ALL RIGHT, WELCOME TO THE
WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 16TH TWO
THOUSAND TWENTY FOUR ELECTRONIC
MEETING.
THE TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
THIS MEETING IS BEING HELD
ELECTRONICALLY BUT WE INTEND TO
CONDUCT IT SIMILARLY RECORDING
IN PROGRESS PUBLIC COMMENT WILL
BE VIA TELEPHONE OR ZOOME ONLY
TO SPEAK DURING ANY OF THE
PUBLIC COMMENT OPPORTUNITIES.
PLEASE CALL TO ZERO SIX THREE
THREE SEVEN NINE SEVEN TWO
THREE AND INTERMEETING GUIDE
NUMBER NINE THREE FOUR SIX
THREE EIGHT FIVE TWO NINE ZERO
SEVEN OR JOIN THE BLINK.
THIS INFORMATION IS ALSO
AVAILABLE ON THE PUBLISHED
AGENDA IN THE PUBLIC NOTICES
SECTION OF THE CITY WEBSITE AND
ON THE BROADCAST OF THIS
MEETING ON CHANNEL 16 XRF IF
YOU COULD CALL NONPROBLEM HAVE
RECEIVED FROM COMMISSIONER
LEIGH ANNE HUTCHINSON WHO
UNFORTUNATELY WON'T BE ABLE TO
ATTEND THIS EVENING.
PLEASE SEE HERE AND FROM WHERE
YOU'RE DINING WHEN YOUR NAME IS
CALLED COMMISSIONER BRAKE'S
COMMISSIONER BROGAN YOU'RE FROM
ANN ARBOR COMMISSIONER CAMPEAU
HERE FROM ANN COMMISSIONAIRE
HAUTAMKI FROM ANOTHER
COMMISSION BOOK HERE FROM ANN
ARBOR COMMISSIONER KILLER
INFORMATION COMMISSIONER LEE IS
ABSENT COMMISSIONER CARPENTER
ACTUALLY I AM HERE FROM BUSAN,
SOUTH KOREA.
>> OH OK THANK YOU FOR JOINING
US.
YUP HELLO COMMISSIONER
CARPENTER UNFORTUNATELY YOUR
AUDIO DOES NOT SEEM OK AND NOT
A PROBLEM.
COMMISSIONER RAMASWAMY
OK
COMMISSIONER LIU HEAR FROM THE
COMMISSIONER MARGOLESE YOU CAN
MAKE SCHERBA HEAR FROM TYRONE
TOWNSHIP COMMISSIONER STUKA AND
COMMISSIONER HUTCHINSON THAT'S
OK.
PERFECT WITH THAT WE DO HAVE
SOME THERE ARE TWO ITEMS ON THE
CONSENT AGENDA TODAY APPROVAL
OF THE AGENDA AND APPROVAL
OF THE MINUTES FROM SEPS
MEETING.
ARE THERE ANY OTHER
MODIFICATIONS TO THE CONSENT
AGENDA?
SO RAISE YOUR HAND OR SPEAK UP
.
>> ALL RIGHT.
SEEING NONE IS THERE A MOTION
TO APPROVE THE CONSENT AGENDA
AS PRESENTED?
>> MAYBE IF WE CAN SHOW THE THE
PEOPLE ON THE SCREEN SO I CAN
SEE HANS
, IS THERE A MOTION TO
APPROVE THE CONSENT AGENDA AS
PRESENTED BY NEGIN SECONDED BY
LISA THANK YOU TO ALL THOSE IN
FAVOR PLEASE SAY YES OR RAISE
YOUR HANDS ON THOSE OPPOSED.
PLEASE SAY NO AND RAISE YOUR
THE AGENDA IS A COMMENT.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
PERSONS TO SPEAK FOR UP TO
THREE MINUTES AGAIN PLEASE CALL
TO ZERO SIX THREE THREE SEVEN
NINE SEVEN TWO THREE AND ENTER
MEETING ID NUMBER NINE THREE
FOUR SIX THREE EIGHT FIVE TWO
NINE ZERO SEVEN OR CONNECT VIA
ZOOM AS DESCRIBED ON THE AGENDA
THAT STAFF WILL SELECT CALLERS
THAT HAVE RAISED THEIR HAND ONE
BY ONE USING THE LAST THREE
DIGITS OF A PHONE NUMBER OR THE
PERSONS YOU MIGHT NEED IN ORDER
TO ELECTRONICALLY RAISE THEIR
HAND TO INDICATE YOUR DESIRE TO
SPEAK PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE ON
YOUR PHONE OR SELECT THE IS
HAND BUTTON.
DO YOU HEAR AUTOMATED
ANNOUNCEMENT THAT THE HOST IS
ALLOWING YOU TO SPEAK WHEN
SPEAKING?
PLEASE MOVE THE QUIET AREA AND
ANY TELEVISION OR BACKGROUND
SILENCE CAN HEAR YOU CLEARLY.
CHRIS, DO WE HAVE ANY MEMBERS
OF PUBLIC WHO WISH TO SPEAK
TONIGHT?
>> IT PEIRSOL
ME A SECOND.
ALL RIGHT.
SAME THING THEN LET'S MOVE ON
BUSINESS THERE FOR THE MONTH
OF OCTOBER.
THERE ARE NOT ANY BUSINESS
ITEMS SCHEDULED.
SO LET'S MOVE ON TO THE
INFORMATION AND DISCUSSION
SECTION.
FIRST UP IS THE STATE OF STREET
RESURFACING PROJECT FROM YOU TO
WILLIAM.
>> THIS PROJECT IS CURRENTLY AN
ENGINEERING DESIGN PHASE.
IT INCLUDES UNDERGROUND UTILITY
WORK AND STREET RESURFACING
CONSTRUCTION IS EXPECTED TO BE
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE AND THIS
PRESENTATION WILL FOCUS ON
ALTERNATIVE USE ON STATE STREET
STATE STREET CONSTRUCTION ON
NORTHVIEW AND THERE IS EXPECTED
TO BE IN TWENTY TWENTY SIX
STAFF WILL PROVIDE AN UPDATE ON
NORTHVIEW THERE AT FUTURE
MEETINGS AFTER THEIR DESIGN
BEGINS.
>> SO CHRIS, DO WANT TO
INTRODUCE OUR PRESENTERS THIS
CHRIS OR THE OTHER ANY
OF EITHER WHOEVER THIS LAW AND
THE BEING FROM WILL BE THE
PRESENT PERFECT.
YEAH, I'M ACTUALLY GOING TO
DEFER TO MY COLLEAGUE MARK
MCCULLOH WITH WAITERING AS WELL
AS PROBABLY MANY KNOW WE HAVE
OUR CONTRACT WITH THE CITY
BANABA TO ACT AS IN-HOUSE
PROJECT MANAGERS ALSO SUPPORT
WITH A FULL ENGINEERING TEAM.
SO WE'VE BEEN WORKING ON THIS
PROJECT FOR QUITE SOME TIME AND
SO WE WANT TO PROVIDE THIS
UPDATE SO I'LL PASS OFF MARK IF
YOU WANT TO SHARE THE SCREEN TO
THROUGH THE PRESENTATION.
>> YEAH.
THANKS CHRIS.
FOR ALL THE COMMISSIONERS.
IF YOU HAVE QUESTIONS ALONG THE
WAY, JUST RAISE YOUR HAND VIA
ZOOM OR PHYSICALLY THEN WE'LL
JUST TRY TO ANSWER QUESTIONS AS
WE GO IF THAT'S OK.
WITH YOU GUYS.
HOW ARE WE ALL DOING THIS
EVENING?
>> VERY GOOD.
THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT, COOL.
WELL, AS CHRIS SAID, MY NAME IS
MARK MCCULLOUGH.
HAPPY TO BE HERE ON BEHALF
OF THE CITY OF VAN ARBER
REPRESENTING WAIT TREM WILL BE
WALKING THROUGH SOME SLIDES
HERE ON STATE STREET
IMPROVEMENT.
>> THIS IMPROVEMENT YOU MAY
HAVE HEARD OF IT WAS ORIGINALLY
PART OF THE NORTH UNIVERSITY
AND THAYER PROJECT BUT IT HAS
BEEN SEPARATED SO THAT WE CAN
FOCUS ON STATE STREET TO GET IT
DONE AND 2025 THE LIMITS
OF CONSTRUCTION ARE GOING TO BE
FROM SOUTH UNIVERSITY TO EAST
WILLIAM STREET.
>> SO THE CITYWIDE GOALS WERE
SOMETHING THAT WAS VERY
IMPORTANT TO NOT JUST THE CITY
BUT ALSO FOR WAY TREM THAT WE
WANTED TO FOCUS IN ON VISION
ZERO IN THE CARBON NEUTRALITY
POLICY SET FORTH BY CITY
COUNCIL WHICH IS IN ZERO BEING
BY 2025 AND BEYOND NO ONE DIES
OR IS SERIOUSLY INJURED IN
CRASHES ON ANN ARBOR STREETS
WHEREAS WITH THE
CARBON NEUTRALITY BY 2030 AND
BEYOND THE TRANSPORTATION
SYSTEM CONTRIBUTES ZERO
EMISSION TOWARDS CLIMATE CHANGE
AND HOW AS YOU GUYS KNOW I'M
PREACHING TO THE CHOIR HERE HOW
THAT PLAYS HAND IN HAND IS
REALLY WHEN YOU DO DESIGN
CONSIDERATION FOR ALL AGES AND
ABILITIES YOU'RE ALSO REDUCING
EMISSIONS BECAUSE YOU'RE
INCLUDING OTHER FORMS
OF TRANSPORTATION TO GET FROM
POINT A TO POINT B SO IN THIS
CASE THESE ARE ALL PICTURES I
TOOK ON STATE STREET.
SO YOU HAVE BIKERS YOU HAVE
PEOPLE IN WHEELCHAIRS THAT ARE
BOARDING TRANSIT AND YOU HAVE
THE WALKERS ON BOTH SIDE OF THE
ROADWAY.
NOT JUST THAT BUT THEY ALSO
NEED ACROSS THE ROAD FROM WEST
TO EAST AND VICE VERSA OF THE
CROSSWALKS.
SO THIS PROJECT WANTED TO FOCUS
IN ON HOW CAN WE MAKE THIS
SCOPE BETTER?
WELL, HOW CAN WE MAKE THE
QUARTER BETTER WITH A SCOPE
THAT USES DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
FOR ALL AGES AND ABILITIES?
>> AND THE FIRST DOCUMENT THAT
WE'VE LOOKED AT WAS A
COMPREHENSIVE TRANSPORTATION
PLAN AS ADOPTED BY THE CITY ANN
ARBOR AND IT AS YOU LIKELY KNOW
THAT STATE STREET FROM SOUTH
UNIVERSITY TO EAST WILLIAM IS
TIER ONE CORRIDOR WHICH
ESSENTIALLY MEANS THAT IT IS A
PRIORITY FOR THE CITY TO
ADDRESS VIA VISION ZERO
PRINCIPLES TO REDUCE CRASHES,
ENHANCE SAFETY SO THAT ALL
USERS
CAN HAVE A BETTER
EXPERIENCE ALONG THE ROADWAY
AND LIKEWISE BECAUSE THE S
UNIVERSITY INTERSECTION IS
INCLUDED IN THE SCOPE OF WORK,
IT'S ALSO IDENTIFIED AS A TIER
ONE PROJECT.
SO WE'VE LOOKED AT THAT
INTERSECTION ON HOW WE CAN
ENHANCE THAT INTERSECTION
THROUGH GEOMETRIC CHANGES WHICH
I'LL GET TO IN A MOMENT TO
ADDRESS THOSE POLICY GOALS.
>> SO TARGET STRATEGIES ONE WE
WANT TO BUILD A SAFE
COMFORTABLE BIKE ROUTE ALONG
THE CORRIDOR.
WE WANT TO MAKE INTERSECTIONS
IN THIS PARTICULAR CASE S
UNIVERSITY SAFER AND EASIER FOR
THE USERS.
WE DEFINITELY NEED TO BE IN
COMPLIANCE WITH THE AMERICANS
WITH DISABILITIES ACT.
WE WANT TO PARTNER WITH
MOBILITY SERVICE PARTNERS.
>> SO IN THIS CASE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN AT AAA, TSA AND
OTHER AGENCIES AND WE WANT TO
IMPROVE TRANSIT RELIABILITY AND
SPEED ALONG THE CORRIDOR
WHETHER THAT BE THROUGH BUS
STOPS OR OTHER AMENITIES.
THIS IS AN AERIAL VIEW OF THE
PROJECT NORTH IS LOOKING UP SO
SOUTH UNIVERSITY THE RED LINE
IS STATE STREET.
SOUTH UNIVERSITY IS THE POINT
OF BEGINNING WITH JUST SHY
OF EAST WILLIAM STREET IS THE
POINT OF ENDING.
SO THE TOTAL PROJECT LENGTH IS
POINT TO MILE PER ANN ARBOR
STREET CLASSIFICATION IS A
MAJOR ROAD AND AS YOU LIKELY
KNOW BOTH SIDES OF THE STREET
IS BOUNDED BY THE UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN CENTRAL CAMPUS AND
THIS IS A HEAVILY USED TRANSIT
CORRIDOR BOTH BY ATIYEH AND THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN.
>> SO THE PROJECT SCOPE WAS TO
DO THE FOLLOWING.
>> WE WANTED TO REPLACE ALL
AGING WATER MAIN UNDERNEATH THE
ROADWAY.
>> WE'RE GOING TO DO SOME
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SO
ENHANCE THE QUALITY OF THE
WATER THAT'S BEEN OUTLET INTO
STREAMS AND RIVERS, RESURFACE
THE PAVEMENT, PROVIDE PROTECTED
BIKE LANES WITH DELINEATOR DUE
INTERSECTION IMPROVEMENTS AT
SOUTH UNIVERSITY PROVIDE
ELEVATED CROSSWALKS AT THE TWO
LOCATION SAID I'LL SHOW YOU IN
A MOMENT AND MAKE TRANSIT
IMPROVEMENTS.
>> ALL RIGHT.
SO THERE'S A LOT TO UNPACK WITH
THE SLIDE SO I'M GOING TO TAKE
IT IN BITE SIZES WILL WORK FROM
THE LEFT SIDE OVER TO THE
RIGHT.
I DO WANT TO NOTE ONE THING
OF MY CURSOR HERE.
I DID ADD THIS LITTLE IMAGE
THIS AFTERNOON AS I WAS
THINKING ABOUT IT.
>> IT WAS GOING TO BE DIFFICULT
TO EXPLAIN THE CONCEPT OF THE
QUEUE JUMP LANE WITHOUT SOME
TYPE OF VISUALIZATION.
SO I DID ADD THAT AND I'M HAPPY
TO PASS THAT ALONG TO YOU GUYS
IF FOR YOUR RECORDS IF YOU LIKE
IT.
>> ALL RIGHT.
SO N POINTING TO THE RIGHT THIS
IS S UNIVERSITY RIGHT HERE AND
THE BASICALLY THE COLOR
COORDINATION YOU'LL SEE OVER IN
THE RIGHT SIDE LOWER RIGHT SIDE
HERE OF WHAT THE COLORS
REPRESENT.
>> SO LET'S START AT THE SOUTH
UNIVERSITY INTERSECTION DOWN
HERE IN THE LOWER LEFT CORNER
OF THE SLIDE YOU'LL SEE HERE
THIS IS ALSO A I DON'T THINK
WE'RE SEEING YOUR CURSOR AND
MAYBE IT'S ONLY ME BUT THERE'S
A WAY TO AF OF THAT'S A GOOD
POINT THERE IT IS.
>> YOU SEE IT NOW.
THANK YOU.
YEAH IT WAS ON MY LAPTOP.
>> THANK YOU SIR FOR BRINGING
THAT TO MY ATTENTION SO RIGHT
HERE IS THE EXISTING LANE THAT
EXISTS AT SOUTH UNIVERSITY AT
THE INTERSECTION OF SOUTH
UNIVERSITY AND STATE AND AS
MANY OF YOU ARE FAMILIAR WITH
IT IT IS I WOULDN'T SAY IT'S
THE MOST IT'S THE IT'S A
TERRIBLY LONG CROSS WING BUT IT
ALSO HAS BEEN IDENTIFIED AS A
TIER ONE INTERSECTION.
SO WE WANTED TO DO WHAT WE CAN
TO BOTH TIGHTEN UP THE RADII SO
THAT COULD STILL WORK WITH THE
TRANSIT MOVEMENTS BUT ALSO
PROVIDE A SHORTER CROSSING SO
THAT THE PEDESTRIAN IS DOESN'T
HAS EXPOSED TO TRAFFIC REDUCES
THE AMOUNT OF TIME THEY'RE
EXPOSED TO TRAFFIC.
SO BY TIGHTENING THAT RADIUS
FROM MEMORY IT'S ABOUT TWENTY
FEET AND I DIDN'T WRITE THAT
DOWN.
I SHOULD HAVE BUT I APOLOGIZE.
I CAN ALWAYS LOOK THAT WE'RE
GOING TO GREATLY ENHANCE THE
SAFETY FOR THE WALKERS BOTH
GOING EAST AND WEST ON THE
NORTH SIDE OF THE INTERSECTION
AND ON THE EAST SIDE THE
INTERSECTION GOING NORTH AND
SOUTH.
>> SO AS WE MOVE ALONG THE
CORRIDOR I DO HAVE THREE CROSS
SECTIONS.
THERE'S GOING TO HELP
SUPPLEMENT WHAT I'M TALKING
ABOUT SO BEAR WITH ME.
IT'LL HELP I CAN GO BACK AND
FORTH AS NEEDED.
>> SHOULD THAT BE HELPFUL?
>> SO RIGHT HERE IS THE
MICHIGAN UNION BUILDING AND AS
WE'RE GOING TO THE NORTH THERE
IS GOING TO BE TWO LANES IN
EACH DIRECTION SOUTHBOUND LANE
NORTHBOUND LANE AND THEN IN THE
RED BLOCK IS A TRANSIT ONLY
LANE.
>> NOW THIS THIS DESIGN LOOKS A
LITTLE BIT IT LOOKS
INTERESTING, LET'S PUT IT THAT
WAY.
AND INTERNALLY WE'VE CALLED IT
CONCEPT TO SEE THIS IS WHAT
WE'VE LANDED ON.
SO THERE'S BEEN SOME ITERATIONS
AND SOME CONTEXT THAT'S NEEDED
SO THAT YOU UNDERSTAND HOW WE
LANDED ON THIS DESIGN WHEN THE
CITY OF ANN ARBOR FIRST
PROPOSED THIS PROJECT, IT WAS
GOING TO BE A MILL INFILL
CROSS-SECTION WHERE I WILL
NEVER REPLACE THE WATER MAIN IN
THE SANITARY.
>> NOW THERE'S NO CENTER IN
THIS ROAD BUT THE IMPROVE THE
STORMWATER AND INCREASE IN AND
REPLACE THE SORRY GUYS REPLACE
THE WATER ME IN AS PART OF THAT
THEY WERE GOING TO PUT IN A
PROTECTED BIKE LANE WITH THE
DELINEATOR AND A BUFFER ON BOTH
SIDES.
IT WAS GOING TO USE THE
EXISTING FOOTPRINT THAT'S THERE
TODAY THE ONE CAVEAT TO IT WAS
THAT THE PARKING ON BOTH SIDES
OF THE ROADWAY WAS GOING TO BE
GONE AWAY.
IT'S MY UNDERSTANDING THAT THIS
HAS BEEN BROUGHT TO THE
ATTENTION OF THE DDA AND BASED
ON WHERE WE'VE LANDED THAT THEY
ARE SUPPORTIVE OF THAT.
THAT'S MY UNDERSTANDING ALONG
THE WAY.
>> AND REMEMBER IS HERE TO
SPEAK TO THAT.
BUT TO BE FAIR, WE ALSO OWN THE
DDA AN UPDATE ON THIS AS WELL.
>> SO WE ARE PLANNING TO
PROVIDE AN UPDATE TO THEM ON
THE IMPACTS OF THE PARK.
THANK CHRIS.
>> SO IN THE INTERIM THERE WAS
DISCUSSION ABOUT HEY, IN THE
INTEREST OF ALTERNATIVE FORMS
OF TRANSPORTATION AND BECAUSE
OF THE AMOUNT OF BUSSES THAT
ARE USED THIS BOTH NORTHBOUND
AND SOUTHBOUND, WOULD IT MAKE
SENSE FOR THIS TO BE A CORRIDOR
BETWEEN SOUTH UNIVERSITY AND
EAST WILLIAM TO BE BUSSES ONLY
WITH PROTECTED BIKE LANES ON
BOTH SIDES THAT WAS
INVESTIGATED.
IT WAS KICKED AROUND.
IT WAS DISCUSSED.
IT WAS TALKED ABOUT AMONG THE
STAKEHOLDERS AND ULTIMATELY THE
DECISION WAS MADE THAT NOW IS
NOT THE RIGHT TIME TO IMPLEMENT
THAT THAT WAS MORE OR LESS THE
CONSENSUS OF THE STAKEHOLDERS
AS I UNDERSTANDING WHAT THEY
ALSO KNEW THAT THERE'S A LOT
OF TRAFFIC GOING NORTHBOUND ON
STATE STREET SO WITH THE BUSSES
SO HOW COULD TRANSIT STILL BE
IMPLEMENTED?
IT IS AN IMPROVEMENT TO THE
PROJECT.
SO WITHOUT HAVING TO WIDEN THE
PAVEMENT ESSENTIALLY THE THREE
LANE CROSS SECTION THAT YOU SEE
IS HOW THIS CAME TO BERTH.
>> SO WE HAVE THE SOUTHBOUND
LANE WHICH WOULD BE SHARED BOTH
BY EIGHT A.M. CARS NORTHBOUND
LANE THAT'S JUST FOR NON
TRANSIT AND THE EXCLUSIVE
TRANSIT LANES.
THERE'S GOING TO BE TWO BUS
STOPS PROPOSED ONE IN FRONT
OF THE UNION WHICH IS AT THIS
TIME ONLY USED BY '88 AND ONE
AT THE ART CENTER AND THESE ARE
CALLED SIDE BOARDING ISLAND BUS
STOPS.
SO WHAT MAKES THESE UNIQUE AND
WHAT MAKES IT A GOOD FEATURE
THAT ENHANCES THE SAFETY HERE
IS IT DOESN'T CREATE A CONFLICT
POINT BETWEEN THE BUS WHEN IT
IS DROPPING OFF AND PICKING UP
PASSENGERS AND THE CYCLIST THAT
IS CONTINUING TO TRAVEL DOWN
THE ROADWAY AND THAT'S BECAUSE
IT'S SEPARATED.
SO OVER HERE AS YOU CAN SEE
WITH THIS SIDE BOARDING ISLAND
THAT'S IN BLEW THE BIKE LANE
WILL TRAVERSE BEHIND THE
BARRIER, CURB THE BUS STOP NOW
WHEN THERE IS A CROSSING HERE
AND HERE WE'RE WE WILL WORK
WITH DESIGN FEATURES SO THAT
THE CYCLIST THE BIKER IS
MANDATORY.
IT'S MANDATORY THAT THEY YIELD
TO THE PEDESTRIAN SO THE
PEDESTRIAN WILL HAVE THE RIGHT
WAY IN A LITTLE BIT AHEAD
OF MYSELF HERE.
BUT JUST WANTED TO THROW THAT
IN THERE.
I MENTIONED THAT THERE'S GOING
TO BE TWO CROSSWALKS AS PART
OF THIS PROJECT.
>> THESE ARE GOING TO BE
ELEVATED CROSSWALKS WHERE
THEY'RE ESSENTIALLY GOING TO BE
SIX INCHES ABOVE THE PAVEMENT
SO THAT IT ENHANCES THE SAFETY
FOR THE PERSON WALKING ACROSS
THE STREET.
SO THEY'RE SEEN BY THE
MOTORISTS AND FOR THE MOTORIST
VICE VERSA TO SEE THEM SO THEY
DON'T HIT THEM, WHICH IS AN
IMPORTANT FEATURE FOR A TIER
ONE PROJECT SUCH AS THIS.
>> SO THAT WILL BE RAMPED UP ON
THE CONCRETE SO THAT THE
CROSSWALK IS ELEVATED, THE TWO
LOCATIONS BEING PROPOSED ARE
BETWEEN UNION AND LSA BUILDING
AND THEN THE ART CENTER AND
ANGEL HALL OVER ON THIS CENTER
ON THE EAST SIDE.
>> LIKEWISE THERE'S A LITTLE
ALLEYWAY BETWEEN THE KENSLEY
BUILDING AND LSA AND IN FRONT
OF ANGEL HALL.
SO THOSE ARE THE TWO LOCATIONS
THAT ARE PROPOSED FOR ELEVATOR
CROSSWALKS NOW TO DOVE A LITTLE
BIT DEEPER INTO THE CROSS
SECTION ITSELF IN THIS
PARTICULAR SPOT WHAT YOU'RE
SEEING RIGHT HERE IN THIS IN
THIS AREA IS A CROSS SECTION
THAT'S REFLECTED EXACTLY RIGHT
HERE.
SO THE SIDEWALK WITH WILL VARY
DEPENDING UPON WHICH SIDE
OF THE ROAD YOU'RE ON AND ALSO
WHERE YOU ARE IN RELATIONSHIP
TO S UNIVERSITY AND OR EAST
WILLIAM STREET.
>> SO WE'LL WALK THROUGH THIS
THAT THAT THERE'S GOING TO BE
THE EXISTING SIDEWALK ON THE
EAST WEST SIDE OF THE ROADWAY
TURBIN GUTTA THAT'S GOING TO BE
TWO FOOT WITH THE BUS.
SO THAT'S CONSIDERED A BUFFER
BETWEEN A PEDESTRIAN AND THE
CYCLIST AND THEN THERE WILL BE
THE SIX FOOT WIDE BIKE LANE AND
WITH THAT THERE WILL ALSO BE A
TWO FOOT BUFFER WITH PAVEMENT
AND DELINEATOR SEPARATING THE
BICYCLIST
FROM THE TRAVELING
SIMILAR TO WHAT YOU WOULD SEE
ON STATE STREET S.
>> S UNIVERSITY THE SOUTHBOUND
LANE WILL BE SHARED BY A BUS
AND BY CARS WHEREAS THE
NORTHBOUND LANE WILL BE JUST
NON TRANSIT ONLY WHEREAT AND
THEN THE FOLLOW THE LAST LANE
IN RED IS WHAT I TALK WE'RE
CALLING IT THE QUEUE JUMP LANE
AND THIS IS TO ENHANCE TIMING
FOR THE BUSSES SO THAT IT'S
MORE EFFICIENT FOR THEM TO STAY
ON SCHEDULE AND MEET THE NEEDS
OF THE PEOPLE THAT ARE RIDING
THE BUS SO THEY CAN GET TO
THEIR DESTINATIONS ON TIME AS
WE TRANSITION FURTHER DOWN THE
ROAD HERE AND MEANING NORTH
TOWARDS EAST WILLIAM STREET
THERE'S A TRAFFIC SIGNAL THAT'S
THERE CURRENTLY THIS WAS DONE
AS PART OF THE SURPLUS STREET I
THINK IT WAS TWO YEARS AGO
MAYBE THREE YEARS AGO NOW THIS
INTERSECTION WAS INCORPORATED
IN THAT DESIGN.
>> THAT SIGNAL THAT'S THERE NOW
IS GOING TO BE MODIFIED
SLIGHTLY WHEREAS IT'S GOING TO
PROVIDE A WE'LL CALL A QUEUE
JUMP SIGNAL AND THAT QUEUE
JUMPERS SIGNAL FORGIVE ME I'M
GOING TO HAVE TO PUSH MY THING
DOWN BECAUSE I CAN'T SEE MY
OTHER SCREEN HERE IS WHEREBY
IT'S GOING TO HAVE A SQUARE
LENS THAT'S GOING TO STAND NEXT
TO THE TRAFFIC SIGNAL AND
YOU'LL SEE HERE WITH THE
ARRANGEMENTS THAT THE STOP BAR
ARRANGEMENT GIVES POSITIONING
TO THE BUS SO THAT THEY CAN GET
FOR THE NAME A JUMP ON TRAFFIC
THAT IS GOING NORTHBOUND THAT'S
STOPPED IN THE AT THE STOP BAR
THAT'S SET FURTHER BACK.
SO HOW THIS WORKS IS THAT THIS
SIGNAL HERE IS ONLY GOING TO BE
REALLY WHAT'S KNOWN TO THE BUS
DRIVER.
SO WHEN IT'S HORIZON HORIZON
THIS BUS HAS TO STOP AND IT'S
IN COORDINATION WITH THE RED
LIGHT BEFORE THEY'RE
TRADITIONAL LIGHT TURNS GREEN.
THIS TRANSIT SIGNAL IS THEN
GOING TO GO VERTICAL.
>> SO SOUTH THE NORTH THAT'S
GOING TO BE THE INDICATION THAT
THE DRIVER HAS SO MANY SECONDS
TO JUMP AHEAD OF ANY AMOUNT
OF CARS THAT ARE SITTING BACK
HERE THAT CURRENTLY EXISTS
TODAY SO THAT THEY ARE NOT HELD
BACK AND THEN EVENTUALLY AFTER
A CERTAIN TIMING IT'LL TURN
GREEN AND THEN THE SYSTEM WILL
GET BACK IN PLACE.
>> THIS SYSTEM IS USED IN MANY
QUARTERS ALONG METROPOLITAN
REGIONS SAN FRANCISCO, SEATTLE
AS CLOSE MEDICINE WISCONSIN.
SO IT'S NOT NEW.
IT HAS BEEN UTILIZED IN OTHER
PARTS OF THE COUNTRY AND HAS
WORKED REALLY WELL.
MAKE SURE I LOOK AT MY NOTES
HERE DE SO CROSS SECTIONS.
>> SO HERE IS THE THREE CROSS
SECTIONS THAT WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT STUDENT UNION WHAT WE
HAVE HERE GET MY FIRST REAL
QUICK QUESTION.
YES SIR.
THE INTERSECTION OF STARTED
BEFORE THIS CROSS SECTION YOU
COULD GO BACK ONE SLIDE.
YEAH, THE SO THE FAR LEFT I SEE
THE BIKE LANE COMING NORTH ON
THE EAST SIDE OF ST. STREET.
DOES IT LIKE HOW DOES IT GET UP
ONTO THE CURB OR YEAH.
RIGHT THERE YEAH YEAH YEAH
YEAH.
OK SO YEAH THAT'S A FAIR
QUESTION.
>> SO THE AND GOOD QUESTION IN
MY CURSOR HERE SO THIS WILL BE
NOT THE IT WOULD BE JUST LIKE
IT YOU SEE AT ANY REALLY
TRADITIONAL INTERSECTION WHERE
THE SURFACE GRADE IS THE SAME
AS A STREET AND THEN AT SOME
POINT WHAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN IS
THAT IT'S GOING TO THEN ELEVATE
SO IT'S GOING TO GO FROM THE
STREET LEVEL AND RISE UP TO THE
BACK OF CURB AS IT'S TRAVERSING
AT SOME POINT I DON'T KNOW
EXACTLY THAT'S A DETAIL WE
HAVEN'T WORKED OUT YET BUT IT'S
GOING TO HAVE AN ELEVATION
CHANGE SO THAT IT CAN AT THIS
RAMP HERE BE AT THE SAME
ELEVATION AS THE CROSSWALK AND
LIKEWISE IT'S GOING TO HAVE TO
BE AT THE SAME ELEVATION AT
THIS CROSSWALK HERE THIS ONE
HERE AT THE BUS STOP, THIS ONE
HERE AND AT SOME POINT WILL GO
BACK DOWN TO GRADE SO THAT IT
CAN THEN CONNECT ON THE CITY
THE NORTH SIDE OF THE ROADWAY.
>> I JUST SEE YOUR QUESTION
OF THE CURVE THERE AND SEE THE
LITTLE BLOW PICTURED ON THE FAR
LOWER LEFT.
I JUST WONDER HOW THE BIKES ARE
GETTING OK.
>> YEAH I GUESS THERE'S A LOT
TO UNPACK HERE.
IT'S THERE'S THERE'S A LOT
OF INTRICATE DETAILS IN THE
SLIDES SO FORGIVE ME IF I
MISSED SOMETHING LISA YEAH.
>> IS IT OK TO ASK QUESTIONS OR
WOULD YOU PREFER THAT WE HOLD
THOSE STILL.
I PREFER LET ME I ONLY GOT
THREE FOUR SLIDES LEFT SO HOW
ABOUT I GET THROUGH THAT AND
THEN WE CAN ANSWER ANY
ENTERTAIN ANY QUESTIONS THAT
YOU HAVE AND ANSWER THEM AS
BEST WE GREAT ALL OF MY
QUESTIONS TILL THEN.
>> THANK YOU LISA.
>> OK SO HERE IS THE CROSS
SECTION FOUR IN FRONT OF THE
STUDENT UNION WE HAVE THE
SIDEWALK ALONG THE EAST SIDE
THE CURB THAT'S THE PROTECTIVE
BARRIER BETWEEN THE BUFFER
BETWEEN THE SIDEWALK AND THE
BIKE LANE MARK ON THE WEST SIDE
THANK YOU.
WEST SIDE OF THE ROADWAY AND
THEN WE HAVE THE CURB LANE WITH
THE CURB WHICH ACTS AS A BUFFER
ON THE WEST SIDE.
THE SIX FOOT BIKE LANE.
AND KEEP IN MIND THESE
DIMENSIONS VARY DEPENDING UPON
WHERE YOU ARE ALONG THE
CORRIDOR.
ANOTHER BUFFER THAT'S GOING TO
BE PHYSICALLY SEPARATING THE
BIKE LANE FROM THE SIDE WARNING
ISLAND BUS STOP THE SOUTHBOUND
LANE THEY'LL BE SHARED BY
BUSSES AND CARS THE NORTHBOUND
LANE WHICH IS JUST FOUR
VEHICLES AND THEN A TRANSIT
LANE WITH THE TWO FOOT BUFFER
AND DELINEATOR SIX FOOT BIKE
LANE CURB AND THEN SIDEWALK ON
THE EAST SIDE TRANSITIONING TO
ANGEL HALL AND MUSEUM OF ART
GOING FROM WEST TO EAST AGAINST
SIDEWALK WILL HAVE THE CURB AND
GUTTER SIX FOOT BIKE LANE TWO
FOOT BUFFER ZONE WITH THE DE
DELINEATOR THE SOUTHBOUND LANE
NORTHBOUND LANE AND THEN THE
TRANSIT LANE WITH ALSO THE SIDE
BOARDING ISLAND BUS STOP NEAR
THE ART CENTER ANGEL HALL
ANOTHER BORDER BETWEEN THE BIKE
LANE AND THE BUS STOP SIX FOOT
BIKE LANE ANOTHER FEATURE TO
SEPARATE DELINEATOR THE BIKE
LANE FROM THE SIDEWALK ALONG
THE EAST SIDE AND FINALLY THE
CROSS SECTION AT TROTTER CENTER
AND THEN THE DIAGNE UNIVERSITY
CAMPUS HERE WORKING ON THE WEST
SIDE OF THE ROADWAY WILL HAVE
THE SIDEWALK CURB AND GUTTER
BIKE LANE DELINEATION WITH THE
BUFFER NORTHBOUND TRAFFIC
SOUTHBOUND TRAFFIC EXCUSE
REVERSE IT SOUTHBOUND TRAFFIC,
NORTHBOUND TRAFFIC AND THEN THE
NORTHBOUND TRANSIT LANE.
>> WHAT'S DIFFERENT HERE IS
THAT YOU'LL SEE A TEN FOOT GIVE
OR TAKE GREEN SPACE AND THAT IS
THERE TO PROTECT THE TREES THAT
EXIST ALONG THAT FRONTAGE BY
ANGEL HALL AND THE CAMPUS AREA.
THE UNIVERSITY SAID HEY, THESE
ARE TREES ARE REALLY IMPORTANT
TO US.
WHAT CAN YOU DO TO PROTECT THEM
SO WE WE CHANGE THE DESIGN UP
IN THIS CORRIDOR, THIS PART
OF THE CORRIDOR IN ORDER TO BE
ABLE TO KEEP THOSE AMENITIES
AND LIKEWISE BIKE BIKEWAY
PROTECTED BIKEWAY BUFFER ZONE
AND EAST SIDE SIDEWALK.
>> SO OUR NEXT STEP WAS OUR
LAST SLIDE HERE.
WE'RE GOING TO FINALIZE
CONCEPTUAL DETAILS.
>> WE'LL FINALIZE THE ROAD, THE
WATER AND STORMWATER BID
DOCUMENTS WE'RE LOOKING TO GO
TO BID ROUND CHRISTMAS CONTINUE
STAKEHOLDER AND PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT.
>> WE CAN TALK ABOUT THAT AND
THEN SPRING TWENTY TWELVE
CONSTRUCTION DATE WHERE WE'RE
LOOKING FOR.
SO WITH THAT CHRIS AND YOU ARE
HERE TO ANSWER YOUR QUESTIONS
FROZE UP.
>> ALL RIGHT.
A COUPLE OF QUESTIONS.
SO THERE'S CURRENTLY A BUS STOP
AT ST. AND WILLIAM IN THIS
RECONFIGURATION.
IS THAT BUS STOP GOING TO BE
ELIMINATED?
>> YES, IT IS MY UNDERSTANDING
THAT THERE WAS DISCUSSIONS WITH
THE UNIVERSITY THAT THEY WANTED
TO CONSOLIDATE THE TWO BUSTLINE
SO THAT ONLY ONE EXISTED IN
FRONT OF ANGEL HALL AT ART
CENTER ANGEL HALL.
OK, AND THEN MY NEXT OVERALL I
LOVE WHAT I THINK THIS
RECONFIGURATION IS PRIORITIZING
ONE THOUGHT IN THE BACK OF MY
HEAD IS WHAT'S THE THINKING
AROUND HOW PASSENGERS DROP OFF
PICK UP WAITING IS GOING TO BE
HANDLED IN THIS NEW
CONFIGURATION JUST BECAUSE I'M
THINKING AT THE ART MUSEUM, THE
MICHIGAN UNION THESE ARE ALL A
HEAVILY TRAFFICKED AREAS THAT
ARE DESTINATIONS I THINK FOR
RECRUITMENT PEOPLE FROM OUT
OF TOWN AND I LOVE THE IDEA
OF MORE KIND OF BETTER TRAFFIC
FLOW ON STATE BUT IT HAS THE
UNIVERSITY OR OTHERS EXPRESS
THOUGHTS ABOUT HOW HAVE THOSE
KINDS OF USE CASES ARE GOING TO
BE HANDLED IN LIKE REINSCH OR
DROP OFF PICK UP HER PLACES IN
THAT AREA?
>> CHRIS, DO YOU HAVE ANY
INSIGHT INTO THAT QUESTION?
WELL, IN TERMS OF USE OF LIKE
TRANSIT LET'S SAY IN TERMS
OF THE SIZE OF THE BUS STOPS
AND THE QUEUING AREAS IN
REGARDS TO WHITE FLOWS THAT
DEFINITELY IS CONSIDERED THE
SIZE OF THE A STOPPED IN TERMS
OF THE ALLOWANCE FOR OTHER
USERS OR OTHER PEOPLE LIKE DROP
OFF THERE.
>> THE SYSTEM CAN TOLERATE SOME
OF HER DROP OFF QUICK DROP OFF
AND THEN ALLOW TRAFFIC TO
SOMEONE TO MOVE ON.
BUT THERE'S GOING TO HAVE TO BE
SOME ENFORCEMENT TO JUST LIKE A
LOT OF OTHER CITY ROADS THAT
DON'T HAVE PARKING LANES AT TO
KIND OF KEEP THE TRAFFIC MOVING
.
BUT WE HAVE BEEN WORKING WITH
THE UNIVERSITY MEETING WITH
THEM FREQUENTLY ABOUT THIS AND
THEY HAVE BEEN TALKING WITH
THEIR TENANTS IN THEIR BUILDING
FACILITIES TO MAKE SURE THAT
THEY'RE ON BOARD WITH THIS AND
UNDERSTAND THAT STATE STREET
MIGHT NOT BE THE BEST PLACE TO
ACTUALLY DROP OFF OR YOU KNOW,
SEND USERS TO LIKE PARK HERE OR
DROP OFF PICK UP PEOPLE HERE.
WE'VE ALSO BEEN LOOKING AT
OTHER AREAS WHERE WE MIGHT BE
ABLE TO ADD SOME ADDITIONAL
CAPACITY FOR PARKING AND THAT'S
STILL A YOU KNOW, KIND OF UNDER
REVIEW TO SEE WHERE WE CAN
MAYBE FIND LITTLE PLACES ON
SOME OF THE BACK ROADS TO ADD
SOME ADDITIONAL SPOTS.
>> OK, THANK YOU.
>> YEAH LUKE YEAH.
I'M JUST CURIOUS ON SOME
DETAILS IF THEY'RE AVAILABLE
THE THE COLOR IN THE SLIDES OR
BUS LANE THERE.
RIGHT.
SO IS THIS REALLY ANTICIPATED
TO BE LIKE 40 COLORED THE
ENTIRE STRETCH IN RED PAINT AND
THE SECOND THE REAL QUESTION IS
AS TO THE THE BUS ONLY TRAFFIC
SIGNAL IF I IMAGINE THAT IT
WOULDN'T MAKE SENSE TO SERVICE
THE BUS MOVEMENT EVERY CYCLE.
IT MAKES SENSE WHEN THE BUSSES
THERE SO IF THERE IS ANY BUS
DETECTION SYSTEM THAT'S THAT'S
INCLUDED IN THIS PROJECT.
YEAH.
THE GREAT QUESTIONS THE BOTH
ARE DETAILS NOW WE'RE STILL
INVESTIGATING.
WE'VE DEFINITELY SHOWN THE RED
PAINT OR THE RED MARKING ON THE
THE TRANSIT ONLY LANE THE QUEUE
JUMPERS JUST BECAUSE IT DOES
POP AND KIND OF DEMONSTRATES
THAT IT IS KIND OF FOR TRANSIT
ONLY IN DISCUSSIONS WITH THE
RIDE AND WITH THE OTHER TRANSIT
.
THEY DEFINITELY HAVE BEEN ON
BOARD WITH THIS TYPE
OF APPLICATION BUT WE REALLY
HAVEN'T GO INTO THE DETAILS IF
IT'S REALLY GOING TO BE PAINT
THE WHOLE WAY, IF IT'S GOING TO
BE SOME OTHER TREATMENT,
THERE'S ALSO DETAILS ABOUT
BECAUSE THIS REALLY IS A
FACILITY INTENDED FOR TRANSIT,
YOU KNOW, FOR THE RIDE AND FOR
THEM THAT THERE WOULD BE SOME
INVOLVEMENT WITH A CASHIER, A
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT WHERE
THEY WOULD PARTICIPATE IN AND
TAKING CARE OF THAT FOR AT
LEAST PROVIDED FUNDS TO TAKE
CARE OF THAT.
SO THAT'S ALSO IN DISCUSSIONS
TO THANK YOU.
LIKE CAN WE TALK ABOUT THE
TRAFFIC LIGHT, THE BUS SANSING
TRAFFIC LIGHT.
SO THE THAT'S THAT IS ANOTHER
ITEM THAT IS STILL UNDER
DISCUSSION IN TERMS OF EXACTLY
HOW THAT'S GOING TO FUNCTION
AND OPERATE.
BUT I THINK IT BRINGS UP A GOOD
IDEA WE DON'T WANT TO REALLY
OPERATE THAT AND USE IT IF A
BUS ISN'T THERE IF WE CAN GIVE
THAT GREEN TIME TO A VEHICLE
INSTEAD IT'S JUST GOING TO MAKE
THINGS OPERATE A LITTLE BIT
MORE EFFICIENTLY.
SO THAT'S SOMETHING WE CAN
DEFINITELY REVIEW.
>> THANK YOU, PETER.
I'VE GOT A COUPLE OF QUESTIONS
ABOUT THAT SIGNAL.
HAVE THEY BEEN USED ELSEWHERE
IN MICHIGAN?
I'VE NEVER SEEN ONE.
IS IT SOMETHING THAT IS
ACCEPTABLE ACCORDING TO THE THE
LAWS THAT WE HAVE FOR TRAFFIC
CONTROL DEVICES IN MICHIGAN?
I'M NOT AWARE OF ANY IN
MICHIGAN CURRENTLY BEING USED
BUT I DON'T THINK THAT'S
BECAUSE OF THE MUTTY BECAUSE IT
IS IT IS RECOGNIZED AND I
BELIEVE IN THE NATIONAL MANUAL
.
>> SO IT'S A GOOD QUESTION AND
I'M GOING TO WRITE DOWN AND
LOOK INTO IT.
BUT IT IS USED IN OTHER STATES
SO IT'S NOT IT'S NOT SOMETHING
THAT'S NEW.
>> IT'S NEVER BEEN USED BEFORE.
OK, SOME OF THE OTHER POINTS I
HAD I THINK WE NEED SOME DESIGN
FEATURES TO PREVENT PEOPLE FROM
ABUSING THE SKIP LANE FROM
PREVENTING INDIVIDUAL DRIVERS
FROM ABUSING THE SKIP LANE THAT
TO ME THAT LOOKS LIKE A
POTENTIAL OPPORTUNITY FOR A
HIGH SPEED CRASH IN A CROSSWALK
RIGHT.
WHEN DRIVERS GET FRUSTRATED BY
LONG LINES ON STATE WHICH
HAPPENED THERE JUST BECAUSE
OF ALL THE TRAFFIC AND ALL JUST
BECAUSE OF THE SITUATION WE
HAVE IN THAT AREA, I CAN SEE
PEOPLE GETTING FRUSTRATED AND
OPTING TO USE THAT SKIP LANE
INAPPROPRIATELY AND UM SO IF
THEY'RE GOING TO IF THEY'RE
GOING FASTER THAN ALL THE OTHER
CARS THAT ARE WAITING ON STATE
STREET, THEN THAT COULD CREATE
A SERIOUS CONFLICT THAT AT THE
CROSSWALK THAT GO I'M SORRY.
>> YEAH THAT'S THERE WE WE'VE
HAD SOME DISCUSSIONS ABOUT
ESPECIALLY AS YOU APPROACH THE
INTERSECTION OF WILLIAM THERE
DEFINITELY IS A NEED WE WANT A
SEPARATE NON TRANSIT VEHICLES
WITH TRANSIT VEHICLES.
YOU DON'T WANT TO REALLY MIX
THEM IN THAT HUGE JUMP LANE.
AND SO WE'VE BEEN TALKING ABOUT
POSSIBLY PUTTING SOMETHING
ALONG THAT LANE LINE THAT
SEPARATES THOSE LANES MAYBE WE
EVALUATE EXTENDING THAT
TREATMENT FURTHER SOUTH IF IF
THE CONCERN YOU'VE RAISED IS
THERE'S A VALID CONCERN THAT WE
NEED TO INVESTIGATE RESULT FOR
MY MY OTHER CONCERN AND THANKS
I MEAN THAT'S THE KIND OF THING
I HAD IN MIND AND THAT'S THAT'S
WORTH INVESTIGATING.
THE OTHER MY OTHER CONCERN IS
THAT THIS IS AN AREA WHERE WE
ALREADY HAVE A LOT OF CONFLICTS
BETWEEN UM PEDESTRIANS AND
CYCLISTS.
THERE'S A LOT OF THEM MIXING
THERE IN THE DIAG AND THAT SET
UP HERE WITH THE WAY THE BUSSES
ARE LOADED AND THE BIKE LANE.
THIS LOOKS LIKE AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR PEDESTRIANS TO SORT
OF INADVERTENTLY END UP IN THE
BIKE LANE AND FOR PEOPLE
WAITING FOR BUSSES TO END UP IN
THAT BIKE LANE.
AND I JUST I'M WORRIED ABOUT
CONFLICTS BETWEEN BUS RIDERS,
PEDESTRIANS AND AND CYCLISTS IN
THIS AREA FOR THAT REASON I
DON'T I DON'T KNOW IF THERE'S A
WAY TO HELP PREVENT THAT OR IF
IF WE WOULD NEED TO SWITCH THE
ORDER OF THE BIKE LANES IN
ORDER TO DO THAT, YOU KNOW, TO
HAVE THEM CLOSER TO THE THE
TRAVEL LANES.
>> BUT KEEP IF YOU DON'T MIND,
MARC SHARE MAYBE ONE OF THE
CROSS SECTIONS OF THE BUS STOPS
ALREADY THEY'RE ANTICIPATING A
SO A LOT OF THE DETAILS STILL
HAVE TO BE WORKED OUT.
>> WE LITERALLY JUST RECEIVED
CONFIRMATION LAST WEEK FROM
THEM THAT THEY WERE GOING TO
PARTICIPATE IN THE FUNDING FOR
THESE ENHANCED BUS STOPS AND
TRANSIT.
Q JUMP LANE LAST WEEK.
SO A LOT DETAILS STILL HAVE TO
BE WORKED OUT BUT THERE'S THESE
OFFERS OWNS ON EITHER SIDE
OF THE BIKE LANE.
THIS ONE'S THE SOUTHBOUND BIKE
LANE NOW THE OTHER SIDE YOU'RE
RIGHT.
YEAH EXACTLY.
I SHOWED THAT ONE FIRST OF THE
BLUE ONE BY THE BUS STOP THAT
OH MY APOLOGIES.
>> SORRY.
YEAH, THAT'S THAT'S THAT'S
THAT'S THE PLACE WHERE WE HAVE
THE THE BUS OR THE BIKERS AND
PEDESTRIANS.
SO THERE'S DIFFERENT TREATMENTS
IN THOSE OFFERS THAT WE'RE
GOING TO EXPLORE.
THERE'S SOME DETAILS OF PUTTING
LIKE RAILINGS BETWEEN THE
SIDEWALK ZONE AND THE BIKE
LANE.
THERE'S OTHERS PUTTING LIKE
LITTLE RACE CURB DELINEATOR ON
IT.
THERE'S THERE'S DIFFERENT WAYS
TO KIND OF SEPARATE CHANNELIZE
CLUSTERING INTO CROSSING ZONES.
SO IT'S A VERY MUCH MORE
CONTROLLED SOMEONE DOESN'T JUST
WANDER INTO A BIKE LANE.
SO THOSE THOSE ARE STILL
DETAILS THAT WE'RE EXPLORING
BECAUSE WE WANT TO MAKE SURE
EVERYBODY'S KIND OF ON THE SAME
PAGE WITH WHAT WE'RE PROPOSING.
SO RIGHT NOW WHAT WE'RE SHOWING
IS KIND OF A MINIMAL APPROACH
BUT THOSE ARE DETAILS STILL
UNDER DISCUSSION.
OK, I ACTUALLY DO HAVE ONE LAST
OBSERVATION IF YOU DON'T MIND.
I'M AT THE CORNER RSU AND STATE
.
THERE'S JUST A LOT GOING ON
THERE AND WE'VE GOT THE ON THE
SOUTHBOUND SIDE WE'VE GOT THE
BUS STOP SORT OF IN THE IN THAT
AREA SO WE'VE GOT THAT THE UM
TAKE RADIUS CURVE THERE THAT'S
GOING TO BE PUSHING BUSSES AND
TRAFFIC SORT OF UM FURTHER INTO
THE SOUTHBOUND LANE AS THEY GO
FROM SOUTH YOU TO ST. AND WE'VE
GOT THE BUS STOP THERE.
IT JUST LOOKS LIKE THERE'S
GOING TO BE A LOT HAPPENING
RIGHT THERE AND I'M I'M WORRIED
ABOUT LARGE VEHICLES NOW HAVING
TROUBLE NAVIGATING THAT TURN
SORT OF COMING HEAD TO HEAD
WITH A BUS THAT'S HEADED
SOUTHBOUND.
RIGHT.
ALL IN THAT CROSSWALK
THAT IS
FULL OF PEOPLE COMING FROM
SOUTH QUAD IN WEST QUAD GOING
TO THE DIAG.
SO UM I'M JUST WONDERING IF
THERE'S A WAY TO EASE SOME
OF THE CONGESTION THERE MAYBE
ONE POSSIBILITY WOULD BE TO
MOVE THE BUS STOP NORTH TO JUST
TAKE SOME OF THE PRESSURE OFF
OF THAT THAT INTERSECTION
SOLUTION.
BUT THAT'S MY CONCERN.
WELL, IF THERE'S A COUPLE ITEMS
THAT WERE MAYBE STILL
DISCUSSING WITH YOU ABOUT AND
THE RIDE ON THAT BUS STOP
LOCATION THAT'S STILL KIND
OF WE NEED TO FINALIZE THIS ON
OUR PAST DISCUSSIONS AT
LOCATION NEXT TO THE UNION WAS
KIND OF WHERE THE DESIRED
LOCATION WAS.
THERE WAS LOTS OF ACTUALLY
MOVING MAYBE TO THE NORTH SO WE
CAN TALK TO THEM ABOUT IF THEY
HAVE THAT DESIRE TO MOVE IT TO
THE NORTH.
THE BUS STOP WHERE IT IS
PROPOSED IN FRONT OF THE UNION
IS ACTUALLY MOVED NORTH
OF WHERE IT CURRENTLY EXISTS
TODAY.
RIGHT NOW IT'S KIND OF ALMOST
UP AT THE STEPS AREA REAL CLOSE
TO THE INTERSECTION.
BUT YOUR POINT OF ANY VEHICLE
OR TRUCK GOING WESTBOUND ON S
UNIVERSITY AND MAKING THAT
RIGHT TURN WE ARE STILL GOING
TO INVESTIGATE TO MAKE SURE
THAT THE TURNING MOVEMENT
OF THOSE VEHICLES CAN MAKE THAT
RADIUS.
SO THAT'S SOMETHING THAT WILL
BE FURTHER INVESTIGATED TO MAKE
SURE THAT THEY DON'T TRACK INTO
THE SOUTHBOUND LANES.
SO THAT WILL ALSO BE REVIEWED
AS WELL.
BUT OUR INTENTION IS NOT TO
MAKE A CONFLICTING MOVEMENT
LIKE THAT OF A BOTTLENECK OR A
PINCH POINT OR A CONFLICT MIGHT
CAUSE A CRASH.
LET ME GIVE THANKS EVERYBODY.
>> I'M MATT CARPENTER AND I'M
CEO OVER AT THE RIGHT AND I
WANT TO THANK THE CITY AND THE
UNIVERSITY.
WHAT A TRIM FOR WORKING WITH MY
COLLEAGUES.
WE'RE VERY EXCITED ABOUT THIS
PROJECT.
IT'S I THINK A BIG STEP FORWARD
FOR TRANSIT PRIORITY AND IT'S
AMAZING THAT THEY'VE MANAGED
SORT OF SHOEHORN AS MANY
FUNCTIONS IN HERE AS THEY HAVE.
SO WE'RE EXCITED ABOUT SOME
OF THE CONTINUING WORK, SOME
OF THE THINGS THAT OTHER
COMMISSIONERS HERE HAVE RAISED
.
I KNOW THE RIDE CONTINUES TO
HAVE AN INTEREST IN THINGS LIKE
HOW TO KEEP MOTORISTS FROM
INTRUDING INTO THE BUS LINE.
THAT'S THAT'S GOING TO BE A BIG
QUESTION.
WE'RE ALL FOR RED PAINT.
WE THINK THAT THAT'S A GREAT
WAY OF SAYING DON'T GO HERE.
THE ACTUAL SIGNAL THE THE OPEN
I CLOSED I KIND OF THING IS
VERY COMMON IN THE INDUSTRY.
MAYBE NOT IN MICHIGAN.
I THINK THERE MIGHT BE AN
EXAMPLE IN DETROIT SOMEWHERE
BUT IT'S VERY COMMON IN THE
INDUSTRY AND WORKS VERY WELL.
OUR CONCERN AND LOOK, WE HAD A
GOOD IDEA ABOUT VEHICLE
DETECTION OR SOME OTHER METHOD
THERE IS IF WE END UP WITH
MULTIPLE BUSSES SO TO RIDE
BUSSES AND TO U OF BUSSES ON A
BUSY DAY, IT'S NOT IMPOSSIBLE
TO SEE THAT ALL OF A SUDDEN
STACK UP THERE CAN ALL FOUR
OF THEM GET THROUGH BEFORE THE
SIGNAL CHANGES OVER?
AND THEN CONVERSELY AS WE'VE
ALREADY DISCUSSED, IF THERE ARE
NO BUSSES THERE, CAN THE SIGNAL
BE MODIFIED TO GIVE MORE TIME
TO PEDESTRIANS, MOTORISTS,
WHOMEVER ELSE IS THERE?
THE BUSSES ARE THERE.
WE DON'T NEED IT.
WE LIKE SORT OF THE SURGICAL
TACTICAL NATURE OF THIS
NORTHBOUND IS DEFINITELY THE
PRIORITY.
THOSE ARE BUSSES HEADING TO THE
BLAK.
THEY'RE USUALLY UNDER PRESSURE
TO GET THERE IN TIME TO MAKE
THE TRANSFER HEADING SOUTH.
YOU KNOW, WE'D LOVE TO HAVE A
BUS IN THAT DIRECTION TOO BUT
IT'S A LOWER PRIORITY BECAUSE
THOSE BUSSES ARE LEAVING THE
BLAK AND THEY HAVE A LONG WAY
TO GO TO THEIR DESTINATION.
THEY PROBABLY HAVE THE ABILITY
TO MAKE UP THE TIME AS THEY'RE
GOING ALONG ON THE ROUTE AND
THEN PETE RAISED THE PEDESTRIAN
BICYCLISTS CONFLICTS.
ONE THING I'D ENCOURAGE WE TURN
TO LOOK INTO WE USE THESE STYLE
BUS STOPS, BIKE LANES ON
WILLIAM STREET NOW AND I
POSSIBLY NORTH OF HERE ON SO
THESE STOPS THESE STYLE ALREADY
EXIST IN THE CITY.
SO YOU MIGHT BE ABLE TO GET A
SENSE OF DO BICYCLISTS AND
PEDESTRIANS HAVE CONFLICTS
THERE NOW WITH WAITING BUS
PASSENGER OR HAVE THEY LEARNED
TO SORT OF ADAPT TO THE NEW
THING AND THEN LAST THING HEY
MATT, SORRY TO INTERRUPT YOU.
>> YOU FROZE AT LEAST ON MY END
YOU FROZE FOR LIKE THREE
SECONDS.
>> WHERE WAS IT ON WILLIAM
STREET.
>> SO LITERALLY I THINK IT'S
RIGHT AROUND THE CORNER LIKE IF
YOU LOOK AT THE PRODUCT DID
BIKE LANES ON WILLIAMS PRETTY
MUCH EVERYTHING WEST OF STATE
ALL THE WAY TO MAIN STREET I
THINK THERE ARE PROTECTED BIKE
LANES THE WHOLE WAY AND I THINK
THERE'S LIKE TWO OR THREE BUS
STOPS ALONG THAT ROUTE.
I THINK THERE'S ONE VERY
SHORTLY AFTER THE TURN THAT HAS
A SIMILAR STYLE WHERE THE BUS
STOP IS YOU HAVE TO GO THROUGH
THE BIKE LANE TO GET TO THE
CURB TO BOARD THE BUS SO THAT
MIGHT BE ANALOGOUS TO WHAT
YOU'RE PLANNING HERE.
SO USEFUL TO LOOK AT IN TERMS
OF DOESN'T WORK.
>> AND THEN THE LAST THING I
DON'T DISAGREE WITH PETE ABOUT
A TURNING RADIUS FROM ESU ON TO
NORTHBOUND STATE STREET THE THE
ORIENTATION OF THE BUS STOP AND
CROSSWALK ARE VERY IMPORTANT IN
THE TRANSIT INDUSTRY.
WE HATE PUTTING BUS STOPS ON
WHAT WE CALL A NEAR SIDE OF A
CROSSWALK.
WE ALWAYS WANT TO GO PAST THE
CROSSWALK BEFORE THE BUS BOARDS
AND THE LIGHTS PEOPLE AND THIS
IS AN IMPORTANT SAFETY REASON
BECAUSE IF THE BUS STOPS SAY
RIGHT, RIGHT FRONT JUST BEFORE
THE CROSSWALK THE PASSENGER
WILL EXIT THE BUS AND
IMMEDIATELY GO INTO THE
CROSSWALK TO CROSS THE STREET
IN WHICH CASE NOW IMAGINE
YOU'RE A MOTORIST COMING UP
FROM BEHIND THE BUS YOU DECIDE
TO OVERTAKE THAT BUS AND YOU'RE
JUST SPEEDING ALONG NEXT TO
THIS BUS AND ALL OF A SUDDEN
SOMEBODY STEPS OUT IN FRONT
OF THE BUS IN THE CROSSWALK.
>> SO WE THERE THEY'RE
UNFORTUNE THERE ARE FATALITIES
LIKE THIS EVERY YEAR IN THE US
BECAUSE OF THE ORIENTATION
OF THE BUS BEING BLOCKING SIGHT
LINE PEOPLE CROSSING FROM A
MOTORISTS COMING UP FROM THE
REAR.
SO WHEN THE BUS GOES TO THE FAR
SIDE OF THE CROSSWALK, THEN THE
PASSENGER GETS OUT AND WALKS
BACKWARDS AWAY FROM THE BUS TO
THE CROSSWALK.
THEY'RE NOW FULLY VISIBLE TO
ONCOMING TRAFFIC HEADING THE
SAME DIRECTION OF THE BUS.
SO THE WAY IT'S DESIGNED IN
YOUR SCHEMATIC RIGHT NOW IS
PROBABLY THE SAFEST WAY IT
COULD BE BECAUSE THE CROSSWALK
IS BEHIND THE BUS STOP AND
MOTORISTS WOULD WOULD SEE THE
PEOPLE TRYING TO CROSS THE
STREET.
SO I DON'T DISAGREE WITH PETE
ABOUT THE TURNING RADIUS BUT
PLEASE KEEP THE ORIENTATION
OF THE CROSSWALKS ON THE BUS
STOPS THE WAY THEY ARE.
THANK YOU.
OTHERWISE GREAT GREAT DESIGN.
WE'RE VERY EXCITED ABOUT THE
BUS STOPS.
I ASSUME THAT THEY WOULD BE
SHARED BETWEEN TODAY AND THEN
BUSSES.
IS THAT RIGHT?
JUST FOR THE NORTHBOUND
SOUTHBOUND IS EXCLUSIVE TO AT
THIS TIME EIGHT OK, ALL RIGHT.
AND THEN A QUESTION ABOUT THE
TRANSIT QUEUE JOB SIGNAL WHEN
IT DOES GO VERTICAL FOR BUSSES
THAT DOES THAT FOR THE BUS
DRIVER THAT SEES THAT WOULD
THAT THEY SEE THAT AS JUST AN
OPPORTUNITY TO GET AHEAD OF THE
CARS AND THEN STOP OR GO ALL
THE WAY THROUGH THE
INTERSECTION BECAUSE WOULD HAVE
AN EFFECT ON WHETHER MULTIPLE
BUSSES COULD EVEN GET THROUGH
ALL THE WAY THROUGH ALL THE WAY
THROUGH.
IT'S LIKE THEY'RE GREEN LIGHT.
OK, RIGHT.
SO IT MAKES SENSE THEN THAT
THERE'S MULTIPLE BUSSES THAT
THEY COULD HOPEFULLY GET
THROUGH.
>> OK, THAT DEPENDS HOWEVER ON
THE DURATION OF THE SIGNAL WITH
A QUEUE JUMPER THE IDEA IS JUST
LONG ENOUGH FOR THE BUS TO PULL
AHEAD OF THE TRAFFIC ONCE THAT
40 FOOT LONG BUS HAS STARTED TO
PULL AHEAD OF YOU, YOU'RE NOT
LIKELY TO RAM INTO IT.
RIGHT.
BUT IF THE FIRST BUS IS GONE
AND THE SECOND ONE HASN'T QUITE
CAUGHT UP TO IT, SOMEONE COULD
SNEAK IN AND LET ALL THE OTHER
TRAFFIC GO.
SO THERE'S I THINK THEY'RE
STILL DOING SOME WORK ON HOW
EXACTLY TO MAKE THAT SYSTEM
EFFECTIVE AND IT'S NOT VERY FAR
UNTIL THE NEXT STOP AT N RIGHT
.
SO THERE COULD EASILY BE, YOU
KNOW, A BACKUP THERE TO AT THAT
LIGHT UNLESS THIS WILL BE TIMED
IN COORDINATION WITH THE NORTH
YOU LIGHT I DON'T KNOW.
>> YEAH.
THERE'S ALSO SOME ROUTES TURN
LEFT AS WELL ON WILLIAM YEAH
RIGHT.
ALL RIGHT.
OTHER QUESTIONS COMMENTS THE
THAT'S A GOOD POINT ABOUT
SIMILAR BUS ISLANDS THROUGHOUT
THE CITY.
I DON'T THINK THERE'S ANOTHER
PLACE NEARBY.
IT'S CERTAINLY NOT WHERE ONE
WHERE WE HAVE A BUS BOARDING
ISLAND LIKE THIS THOUGH IN ANN
ARBOR THAT HAS THIS VOLUME
OF PEDESTRIAN TRAFFIC.
I MEAN THIS IS LIKE STATE
STREET DURING THE SCHOOL DAY IS
LIKE OFF THE CHARTS
.
SO I JUST WANT TO BE CAREFUL
ABOUT ABOUT THE COMPARISON.
>> YEAH.
AND THIS ONE I PULLED UP THE
WILLIAMS ONE AND DIVISION ONE
AND THIS ONE IS DIFFERENT
BECAUSE WE ARE PROVIDING A LOT
MORE STORAGE FOR PEDESTRIANS, A
PLACE FOR PEOPLE TO QUEUE AND
WAIT FOR A BUS THAT'S NOT ALSO
SHARED WITH THE FACILITY BIKE
LANE.
SO IT'S DEFINITELY SIZED FOR
THE VOLUME OF PEDESTRIANS AND
USERS
.
>> SORRY WE USED UP SO MUCH
TIME BUT THANK AS I WAS VERY
GLAD THAT THAT YOU GUYS BROUGHT
US FORWARD AND THAT WE HAD SOME
OPPORTUNITY TO HAVE INPUT AT
TIMES THAT IS PERFECT AND I
LOOK FORWARD TO SEEING THE YOU
PLAN SOMETIME IN THE FUTURE AS
WELL.
SO ALL RIGHT.
YEAH.
THANK YOU.
THANKS TO YOUR TEAM FOR COMING
IN PRESENTING THIS TO US.
I'M PERSONALLY VERY EXCITED
ABOUT IT AND WE'LL LOOK FORWARD
TO UPDATES ON FUTURE.
THANK YOU FOR INVITING US
EXCITE GREAT SELEX.
LET'S NEXT MOVE ON TO THE
DOWNTOWN AREA CIRCULATION'S
STUDY.
WE HAVE THE WHOLE TEAM FROM
AYDA AND OTHER GROUPS HERE.
THE CITY IN THE DOWNTOWN
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY ARE
WORKING ON THE DOWNTOWN AREA
CIRCULATION'S STUDY TO EVALUATE
MULTIMODAL USER SERVICES IN
DOWNTOWN AND SURROUNDING AREAS
.
SO THIS PRESENTATION WILL
HIGHLIGHT KEY PROJECT PROPOSALS
AND IDENTIFY THEIR DEVELOPMENT
STAGE IN EITHER PLANNING OR
ENGINEERING DESIGN.
SO THE NEXT PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT
EVENT HERE IS OCTOBER TWENTY
THIRD.
I THINK THAT'S THE ONE AT THE
LIBRARY.
I'M ASSUMING I JUST GOT AN
EMAIL ABOUT THAT FROM ELEVEN TO
SEVEN SO I'LL TRY TO MAKE SURE
IF I CAN BUT ANYWAY TAKE IT
AWAY.
THANK YOU.
HELLO EVERYONE.
>> I'M TREVOR BRIGHTON.
I'M A TRANSPORTATION PROGRAM
MANAGER AND TRANSPORTATION
PLANNER AND THE TRANSPORTATION
TEAM AT THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR
AND WE'VE BEEN WORKING WITH THE
DDA MY COLLEAGUE FROM THE DDA
AMBER MILLER, OUR PROJECT
MANAGER FOR THE DAY IS HERE AS
WELL.
SHE'LL BE WILL BE GOTTEN BACK
AND FORTH TO GIVE YOU AN UPDATE
FOR THE PRESENTATION.
SO I BELIEVE I CAN CAN I SHARE
MY SCREEN LIKE I CAN?
>> LET ME TRY IT AND GO.
ALL RIGHT.
SLIDE SHOW IS UP.
>> IT'S COMING THROUGH.
SO I WANTED TO THIS IS THE
SECOND TIME WE'VE ADDRESSED THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION FOR
THE STUDY THE FIRST TIME WAS
LAST YEAR AROUND THIS TIME
SINCE THEN WE HAD SOME PRETTY
SIGNIFICANT ENGAGEMENT AND
REFINEMENTS ON THINGS.
>> AND SO WHEN YOU COME BACK
HERE AHEAD OF THE NEXT AND
ENGAGEMENT TO GET SOME OF YOUR
FEEDBACK AGAIN THIS IS A THIS
IS A PLANNING STUDY AND ONE
THAT'S TRYING TO FILL IN SOME
OF OUR THOUGHTS ABOUT THE
DOWNTOWN AREA AND HOW THE
STREETS CAN WORK IN THE LIMITED
SPACE THAT'S THERE.
THIS IS A PARALLEL PLAN SORRY.
>> IS THIS BLOCKING EVERYBODY
THAT TO ME OK, THERE'S A
THERE'S A SQUARE THERE'S A
TOOLBAR AT THE TOP.
DIDN'T WANT TO BE BLOCKING
THINGS.
>> THANK YOU.
ANYWAY, THERE ARE THREE
PLANNING EFFORTS THAT ARE GOING
ON RIGHT NOW.
THE FIRST IS THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN OR LAND USE PLAN.
THE CITY'S LAND USE IT FOR THE
ENTIRE CITY IS UP TO DETERMINE
VISION AND PRIORITIES FOR THE
FUTURE OF THE CITY AND THERE'S
QUITE A BIT OF CHANGES BEING
PROPOSED FOR FOR DENSITIES AND
ORIENTATION TOWARDS TRANSIT.
THERE'S THE DOWNTOWN AREA
CIRCULATION STUDY WHICH IS TO
IDENTIFY FOR FUTURE CAPITAL
IMPROVEMENTS IN THE DOWNTOWN
AREA FOR STREETS AS WELL AS
MAKE SOME TRANSPORTATION PLAN
UPDATES TO BE ABLE TO FURTHER
THE THE THE VISION GOALS IN THE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN.
WE'RE ALSO TRYING TO BALANCE
THE DEMANDS OF THE LIMITED TOWN
DOWNTOWN STREET AREA SPACE AND
THEN ADDITIONALLY THE DEA IS UP
FOR RENEWAL AND IS IS FORMING
ITS ITS PROJECT IS PROGRAM TO
HAVE THIRTY YEARS OF PROJECTS
BE ABLE TO BE TO BE THOUGHT
OF TO BE VISUALIZED AND TO BE
TO BE DEVELOPED OVER THE COURSE
OF A 30 YEAR TIME FRAME.
>> SO ALL OF THE THREE THINGS
ARE KIND OF WORKING TOGETHER.
>> THE DOWNTOWN AREA
CIRCULATION STUDY ITSELF HAS
FOUR DIFFERENT EMPHASIS.
THERE IS FOUR FOUR DIFFERENT
AREAS BUT LOOKING AT THE
BICYCLE SYSTEM, THE TRANSIT
ENHANCEMENTS TO THE PEDESTRIAN
BIKE ENVIRONMENT AS WELL AS TO
THE STREET NETWORK AND ALL
THESE THINGS HAVE RELATIONSHIP
TO EACH OTHER BUT HAVE ARE
DISTINCT ENOUGH TO TAKE A LOOK
AT INDIVIDUALLY AS WELL.
>> AND FINALLY I WANT TO REMIND
PEOPLE ABOUT THE VALUES THAT
REALLY OVERLAP THIS THIS EFFORT
AND WE'RE TRYING TO WHICH WE'RE
GROUNDING AND TRYING TO FURTHER
THROUGH THROUGH THIS ABOUT THIS
PLANNING EFFORT THE DDA VALUES
ALONG THE BOTTOM, MATCHAM VERY
WELL WITH THE VALUES THAT ARE
EXPRESSED AND AND AND ABOUT
MOVING TOGETHER TOWARDS VISION
ZERO AND WE'RE TAKE SOME PAINS
TO TO TIE THOSE TOGETHER WITH
WITH SOME OF THE
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT ARE COMING
OUT OF THIS STUDY.
>> WANT TO GIVE YOU JUST A
MOMENT TO TAKE A LOOK AT THE
RESULTS FROM OUR COMMUNITY
ENGAGEMENT AND MARCH AND APRIL
WE HELD SEVEN EVENTS IN THOSE
IN THOSE MONTHS WE HAD OVER
THREE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY
ATTENDEES RECEIVED OVER EIGHT
HUNDRED COMMENTS AND OVER AND
HAD TWENTY SEVEN STAKEHOLDER
SMALL GROUP MEETINGS DURING
THAT TIME REALLY ROBUST AND
DIVERSE SET OF FEEDBACK THAT WE
GOT IN A SHORT AMOUNT OF TIME
AND WE WERE ABLE TO SIFT
THROUGH IT AND WELL ANYWAY THE
ALSO AT THE TIME THE THE AMONG
THOSE TWENTY SEVEN STAKEHOLDER
MEETINGS AND OTHERS THAT WE
WENT THROUGH AND CONTINUED TO
ENGAGE IN BUSINESS AREAS
OF SHARING MEETINGS WITH
MEETINGS WITH THE RIDE AND WITH
U OF TO LEARN MORE ABOUT WHAT
THEY ENVISIONED FOR TRANSIT USE
IN THE CITY CITY STREET DESIGN
TEAM MEETINGS IN WHICH ALL
DIFFERENT DEPARTMENTS OF THE
CITY COME TOGETHER AND TAKE A
LOOK AND AND SHARE A
CONVERSATION ABOUT HOW TO
APPROACH STREET DESIGN AND
MAINTENANCE.
THREE DDA BOARD SESSIONS, TWO
MEETINGS WITH ANN ARBOR PUBLIC
SCHOOLS MEETING WITH BIKE
ENTHUSIASTS AT HAND OF OUR
HAPPY HOUR A BIKE SUMMIT THAT
WE SURVEY GO UP TO THE LEFT
OF CENTER AS WELL AS A HOUSING
COMMISSION SURVEY TO FURTHER
EXPLORE HOW THEIR CUSTOMERS ARE
USING TRANSPORTATION BIKES,
TRANSIT ETC. AND THE RESULT
OF THIS WHEN WE BOIL DOWN WHAT
WE'VE HEARD MOST OFTEN ABOUT
ABOUT MANY OF THESE CATEGORIES
FIRST OF ALL WE HEARD VERY
STRONG SUPPORT FOR BIKE
CONNECTIONS THAT ARE FORMING IN
AND AROUND DOWNTOWN OVERALL
SUPPORT ENTHUSIASM FOR
INCREASING THE AVAILABILITY AND
THE EXTENT OF THE LOW STRESS
BIKE NETWORK THAT IS FORMED IN
DOWNTOWN AND DESIRE FOR CONTEXT
SENSITIVE DESIGNS.
>> THERE WAS ALSO CLEAR SUPPORT
FOR TRANSIT IMPROVEMENTS
INCLUDING BETTER FREQUENCY,
GREATER SERVICE HOURS AND
GEOGRAPHIC REACH.
THE PEDESTRIAN ENVIRONMENT WE
HAD A STRONG VISION FOR A
VIBRANT PUBLIC REALM WITH WITH
BEAUTIFUL PEDESTRIAN STREETS
AND AMENITIES THAT CAN ATTRACT
A RANGE OF PEOPLE AND FAMILIES
.
>> THE STREET NOW ITSELF THERE
WAS SUPPORT FOR RESTORING THE
TWO WAY TRAFFIC ON FIFTH AND
DIVISION AND IT IS A DESIRE FOR
CALM, SAFE STREETS AND IMPROVED
WAYFINDING AND INTERSECTIONS.
>> DOWNTOWN'S ROLE IN THE
COMMUNITY WAS GOT QUITE A FEW
COMMENTS ABOUT THAT, ESPECIALLY
A DESIRE FOR MORE HOUSING
OPTIONS, AFFORDABILITY AND THE
DIVERSE AND INCREASING
DIVERSITY OF POPULATION
STRENGTHEN THE QUALITY OF PLACE
TOGETHER AND IMPROVE LIVABILITY
AND EXPANDED AMENITIES.
PUBLIC SERVICES AND SPACE.
AND WE ALSO HEARD DO THE
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN QUITE
OF QUITE A LOT OF SUPPORT FOR
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION, A
CLIMATE ACTION REDUCTION OF CAR
DEPENDENCY AND RENEWABLE
ENERGY.
>> WHERE WERE THE MOST CITED
DESIRES NOW THE WHEN WE MET
WITH STAKEHOLDERS THERE ARE
OFTEN TIMES IN WHICH THE THE
STAKEHOLDERS THEMSELVES A
LITTLE BIT OF A CONTRARY BUT A
DIFFERENT TAKE A DIFFERENT
ANGLE ON THE FEEDBACK WE WERE
GETTING IN GENERAL.
FOR EXAMPLE, I JUST WANT TO
PULL OUT SOME OF THE SOME
OF THE PERSPECTIVES IN THE
BUSINESS DISTRICTS THAT ARE IN
THE CONVERSATIONS THAT TOOK
PLACE WITH THEM.
THE BUSINESS DISTRICTS HAD A
DESIRE FOR MORE ATTRACTIVE AND
FLEXIBLE BARRICADES RATHER THAN
LOOKING LIKE A CONSTRUCTION A
LACK OF THEY WANTED TO MAKE
SURE THAT THERE WAS KNOWN THAT
THERE WAS A LACK OF PROGRAMING
STAFF TO SUPPLY THE PROGRAMING
THAT IS NEEDED FOR A MORE
ACTIVE VIBRANT STREET
ENVIRONMENT.
THERE'S A BRANDING ISSUE THAT
GOES ABOUT WITH THE STREET
CLOSURES THAT MAKES IT SOUND
LIKE SOMETHING IS BEING TAKEN
AWAY RATHER THAN THINGS THAT
ARE BEING ADDED TO THE
ENVIRONMENT AND THE SPACE
WANTED TO LEVERAGE EVENT
STREETS AND OTHER OTHER WAYS TO
CREATE FLEXIBLE SPACE IN THE
STREETS AS A REASON TO LINGER
DOWNTOWN.
>> HERE'S SOMETHING THAT IS
VERY IMPORTANT THE ACCESS TO
THE PARKING DECKS AND THE
LEGIBILITY OF GETTING BACK AND
FORTH TO THEM, THE CONNECTIVITY
AND EXPERIENCE FOR THEM IS VERY
IMPORTANT.
THE DOWNTOWN BIKEWAYS IN THEIR
VIEW HAVE SOMEWHAT HINDERED
THEIR BUSINESSES AND SOME AND
THERE'S WORRY THAT DOWNTOWN
BIKEWAYS ARE DISCOURAGING
PEOPLE FROM ARRIVING VIA
AUTOMOBILE AND THERE'S ALSO
MIXED SUPPORT FOR THE CITY AND
THE COMMITMENT FOR VISION ZERO
AND CARBON NEUTRALITY BEFORE
GOING ON TO SOME OF THE TO THE
PILLARS OF THE BIKE PROPOSALS
AND KINDS OF PROPOSALS, ET
CETERA.
WHEN I INVITE MY COLLEAGUE
AMBER MILLER TO TALK ABOUT SOME
OF THE KEY DOWNTOWN DATA
FINDINGS THAT
WE SAW THERE SOME
REALLY INTERESTING DATA I WANT
TO GIVE HER A CHANCE TO SPEND A
FEW MINUTES GOING OVER THAT.
>> AMBER, THANKS TO HER.
SO AS TREVOR MENTIONED, WE JUST
WANTED TO GIVE YOU ALL OF A
COUPLE SITES ON DATA SHARE SOME
CONTEXT FOR HER DOWNTOWN VISITS
HAVE BEEN CHANGING IN THE LAST
COUPLE OF YEARS.
SO THIS IS A SIGN THAT SHOWS
SOME DATA FROM A SOURCE CALLED
PLACER.
IT'S ESSENTIALLY ANONYMIZED
CELLPHONE DATA THAT TRACK VISIT
TRENDS AND WHAT YOU'RE SEEING
ON YOUR SCREEN ARE EMPLOYEE
VISITS, RESIDENT VISITS AND
VISITOR VISITS.
SO THAT FIRST CHART IN THE
UPPER LEFT THAT IS SHOWING HOW
RESIDENT VISITS AND EMPLOYEE
VISITS HAVE CHANGED PRE
PANDEMIC TO POST PANDEMIC.
>> SO PRIOR TO THE PANDEMIC WE
HAD ABOUT ONE POINT EIGHT TO
TWO MILLION RESIDENT VISITS
OCCURRING ANNUALLY DOWNTOWN AND
ABOUT FOUR POINT SEVEN TO FIVE
POINT ONE MILLION EMPLOYEES.
THAT'S OCCURRING ANNUALLY AFTER
THE PANDEMIC WITH THE SHIFT AND
TRANSITION TO STAY AT HOME.
WE'VE SEEN THOSE EMPLOYEE
VISITS DROP SIGNIFICANTLY.
WE'VE LOST ABOUT A MILLION
EMPLOYEE VISITS ANNUALLY AND
WITH THE INCREASE IN HOUSING
DOWNTOWN WE HAVE SEEN RESIDENT
VISITS INCREASED BY ALMOST THAT
SAME AMOUNT.
SO REALLY WE'VE SEEN THE SHIFT
FROM EMPLOYEE ACTIVATION DURING
THE DAYTIME TO RETINA
ACTIVATION DOWNTOWN.
>> THE CHART BELOW THAT SHOWS
ANNUAL JUST VISITOR VISITS AND
OVERTIME THAT HAS BEEN STEADILY
INCREASING.
>> SO OVERALL THE VISITS TO THE
DOWNTOWN ARE ABOVE THE PRE
PANDEMIC LEVEL BUT WE ARE
SEEING CHANGES IN WHEN PEOPLE
ARE COMING DOWNTOWN AND THE
BUSIEST HOURS DOWNTOWN ARE
REALLY SHIFTING FROM THAT KIND
OF LUNCHTIME CROWD TO EVENING
WEEKEND.
EVERYONE WANT TO KEEP ADVANCING
BUT DO YOU MIND GOING BACK ONE?
>> ALL RIGHT, SO WE ARE ALSO
ABLE TO USE THIS DATA TO TRACK
HOW VISITS CHANGE WHEN WE MAKE
STREET CHANGES.
SO WHAT YOU ARE SEEING HERE OUR
VISIT TRENDS FROM PRIOR TO
CONSTRUCTION AND AFTER
CONSTRUCTION ON FIRST AND
ACTUALLY STREETS AND THE
BIKEWAY PROJECTS AND SO ON
FIRST AND ASHLEY WE SAW A
TWENTY PERCENT INCREASE IN
VISITS FOLLOWING CHANGES TO THE
STREET COMPARED TO EIGHT
PERCENT FOR THE MAIN STREET
AREA OVERALL AND ON THE BIKE
PORTER IS ABOUT A 30 PERCENT
INCREASE TO VISIT ALONG THE
STREETS COMPARED TO EIGHT
PERCENT FOR A DISTRICT AS A
WHOLE.
>> SO WE ARE SEEING MORE PEOPLE
USING THESE STREETS AND THESE
CHANGES REALLY ARE MORE THAN
JUST TRANSPORTATION CHANGES.
>> THEY ARE ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT AND PLACE MAKING
CHANGES AS WELL AND HOPEFULLY
YOU'VE ALREADY HEARD ABOUT THIS
BUT WE DO HAVE BIKE AND
PEDESTRIAN COUNTERS IN PLACE
DOWNTOWN AND THERE IS A
DASHBOARD AVAILABLE ON THE
WEBSITE WHERE YOU CAN SEE HOW
MANY PEOPLE ARE USING THE
BIKEWAYS.
IN THE MONTH OF JUNE OVER
TWENTY SEVEN THOUSAND BICYCLE
TRIPS WERE COUNTED AT THREE
LOCATIONS.
SINCE THIS TIME WE'VE ACTUALLY
ADDED COUNTERS ON FIRST STREET
AND A COUPLE OF OTHER LOCATIONS
DOWNTOWN.
SO WE NOW HAVE PRETTY NICE DATA
SET OF PEOPLE WALKING AND
BIKING ON THESE STREETS
.
WE'RE ALSO SEEING POSITIVE
SAFETY OUTCOMES AS WELL FOR TO
A RESTORATION FIRST AND
ACTUALLY THE PERCENT OF DRIVERS
TRAVELING ABOVE THE SPEED LIMIT
DECREASED BY ABOUT FORTY THREE
PERCENT ON THE NEW BIKE
STREETS.
NO SERIOUS INJURIES OR FATAL
CRASHES HAVE OCCURRED TO STREET
USERS OF ANY MODE AND THERE
WERE SERIOUS OR FATAL CRASHES
PRIOR TO THESE CHANGES AND THIS
IS HAPPENING EVEN WHILE BICYCLE
TRAFFIC HAS INCREASED
SIGNIFICANTLY ON FIFTH AVENUE
AND ATTRITE STREET BEFORE THE
PROJECT CONSTRUCTION WE WERE
SEEING LESS THAN HALF
OF DRIVERS STOPPING FOR
PEDESTRIANS TRYING TO CROSS THE
STREET.
AND IN THE POST CONSTRUCTION
STUDY NEARLY ALL DRIVERS
STOPPED FOR PEDESTRIANS DRIVING
DOWN TO PICK IT BACK UP.
YES, THANK YOU.
SO AND AS WE'RE LOOKING THROUGH
THE THE STUDY AND FURTHERING
THE TRANSPORTATION PLAN, THE
MOVIE TOGETHER TOWARDS VISION
ZERO TRANSPORTATION PLAN, WE
LOOKED AT MANY OF THE
STRATEGIES ARE EXPRESSED IN THE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN AND ALONG
THE ALONG THE LEFT SIDE ARE SIX
BULLET POINTS THAT ARE ALL
STRATEGIES THAT ARE WITHIN THE
PLAN THEIR STATED WITHIN THE
PLAN AND WHICH THIS PROJECT
FURTHERS.
>> HOWEVER, AS WE ARE LOOKING
AT SOME PLACE LIKE THE DOWNTOWN
STREETS AND WHICH HAVE LIMITED
SPACE AND LOTS OF USES THERE
WILL BE TRADE OFFS THAT AND
THEN WHEN WE TRY TO LOOK AT
THESE STRATEGIES AND TRY TO
TAKE A CLOSE LOOK ABOUT WHAT
ARE SERVING AND WHICH
STRATEGIES THEY'RE FURTHERING
AND HOW THEY CAN WORK TOGETHER
IN A DOWNTOWN NETWORK MORE THAN
EVERYWHERE ALL AT ONCE AT THE
SAME TIME.
SO LOOKING AT THESE BETWEEN
BUILDING OUT A SAFE,
COMFORTABLE NETWORK BIKE ROUTES
MAKING INTERSECTIONS SAFER AND
EASIER, PRIORITIZING TRANSIT
RELIABILITY AND SPEED, CREATING
SHARED STREET SPACES, FOCUSING
ON THE AREAS WITH THE MOST
SERIOUS CRASHES AND ADDRESSING
DANGEROUS DRIVING BEHAVIORS WE
NEED TO TAKE A LOOK AT THINGS
LIKE THE POTENTIAL TO REMOVE A
SIGNAL BUT IT COULD IMPACT
TRANSIT OPERATIONS AND SO IN
WHICH WHEN YOU HAVE TRANSIT AND
CHANGES TO THE SIGNALIZATION
PERHAPS WE TAKE A SECOND LOOK
WHEN THERE'S SEPARATED BIKE
LANES AND TRANSIT ONLY LANES
THEY COULD EASILY ON EITHER
STREET WHEN THEY'RE CURBSIDE
BIKE LANES WHERE THE CURBSIDE
BIKE LANES NEEDED TO SUPPORT
BUSINESS AND ACTIVITY AND ALSO
WHERE ARE WHERE RADIOS WHERE
ROADS ARE GOOD BUT WHAT ARE SO
WHEN WE'RE LOOKING AT
REALLOCATING SPACE IN THE
ROADWAY, HOW DO WE RESERVE
SPACE FOR TRANSIT AS FAR AS
WHAT WE'RE DOING THAT'S THERE
TRADEOFFS INHERENT IN ALL
OF THIS AND WHEN WE TAKE A LOOK
THROUGH THESE RECOMMENDATIONS,
WE'LL SEE HOW THEY KIND OF PLAY
OUT THE FIRST STARTING WITH THE
BICYCLE SYSTEM, HOW THIS
CONNECTS TO TO TO THE VALUES
AND WHY WE ARE WHY WE ARE
EMBARKING OR RECOMMENDING THE
EXPANSION OF THE BIKE SYSTEM.
IT HAS SO MUCH TO DO WITH
ACCESS WITH KNOWING THAT 30
PERCENT OF PEOPLE IN ANY
COMMUNITY TYPICALLY DO NOT HAVE
ACCESS TO A CAR DUE TO THE AGE
OF THE OTHER SOCIOECONOMIC
FACTORS OTHERS CHOOSE TO WALK
BIKE OR RIDE THE BUS FOR HEALTH
AND ENVIRONMENTAL REASONS AND
ALL THESE PEOPLE AND A GOOD
PERCENTAGE OF OUR POPULATION
NEED TO BE ABLE TO GET SAFELY
TO WHERE THEY NEED TO GO
THROUGH IN THE CITY.
>> SECOND REASON IS TO TRY TO
PROMOTE GREATER ACCESS TO BIKE
ROUTES AND MAKING IT MORE
COMFORTABLE TO BIKE IN ANN
ARBOR.
AND SO IF YOU HAVE A METRO BIKE
LANE ONLY OF A BRAVE FEW 15
PERCENT OF THE ABLE BODIED
RIDERS ARE TYPICALLY WILLING TO
RIDE WITH SEPARATED BIKE LANES
IN THEIR CORNER MORE
COMFORTABLE YOU CAN GET 60
PERCENT OR MORE OF BIKE ABLE
BODIED BIKE RIDERS OUT AND
WILLING TO RIDE CERTAINLY WITH
BUILDING CONNECTED NETWORK
YOU'RE ABLE TO GET MORE OF THIS
CONNECTED SPACE AND ABLE TO
REACH AND ACCESS MORE THINGS
OUT IN THE COMMUNITY AND SO
MORE PEOPLE BIKING IS AN
ADVANTAGE THAN AN BECAUSE IT
SLOW SPEEDS AND IMPROVE SAFETY
FOR EVERYONE.
IT REDUCES THE NUMBER OF CARS
ON THE ROAD.
IT REDUCES CARBON EMISSIONS AND
IMPROVES ACCESS AND CHOICES FOR
ALL THE HOW DOES THAT PLAY OUT
ARBER AND OUR TRANSPORTATION
PLAN MOVING TOGETHER
TRANSPORTATION AND IDENTIFIED
MOST DOWNTOWN STREETS AS
PROPOSED ALL AGES AND ABILITIES
.
IF YOU TAKE A LOOK AT THE RIGHT
SIDE IT IS A SCREEN CAPTURE
OF OUR TRANSPORTATION PLAN THAT
SHOWS THE AMBITIONS FOR AN ALL
AGES AND ABILITIES NETWORK THE
GREEN LINES ARE EXISTING ALL
JUST ABOUT THESE ROUTES AND
THEN THERE ARE THE PURPLEST
PROPOSED ROUTES AND YOU CAN SEE
ALMOST EVERY STREET IN THE
DOWNTOWN AREA IS PROPOSED FOR
AN ALL AGES ABILITIES ROUTE.
>> ROAD CONDITIONS AS SUCH AS
THEY ARE WOULD REQUIRE
SEPARATION OF BIKE LANES AND
FOR MOST OF THE STREETS AND SO
WHEN TAKING UP SPACE FOR
SEPARATED BIKE LANES, ALL
STREETS REALLY CROWDED OUT THE
USES OF ALL THE OTHER COMPETING
INTERESTS THAT REALLY MAKE OUR
FURTHER APLAN TOWARDS ITS
GOALS.
SO PUTTING THE PLAN INTO
PRACTICE WE NEED TO RECOGNIZE
THERE ARE TRADEOFFS TO BE MADE
AND BE STRATEGIC ABOUT WHAT
ROUTES ARE SELECTED FOR ALL
AGES AND ABILITIES AND BALANCE
THE COVERAGE AND ACCESS ALONG
ALONGSIDE FUNDING CONSTRAINTS
BECAUSE EACH ONE OF THESE
PROJECTS NEEDS TO SEEK OUT ITS
OWN FUNDING AS IT GOES ALONG
NOT EVERY DOWNTOWN STREET NEEDS
ALL AGES AND ABILITIES FACILITY
EITHER.
THAT'S WHEN WE TAKE A LOOK WHEN
WE SCAN AROUND FOR BEST
PRACTICES OUR PEERS AND
NEIGHBORS THAT ARE TRYING THE
SAME THINGS.
YOU REALLY JUST NEED ACCESS TO
A ORDERS AND ABILITIES NOT NEED
IT FOR EACH AND EVERY STREET IN
THE AREA.
SO THE APPROACH THE REVISED
APPROACH THAT WE'RE PROPOSING
IN IN THIS STUDY IS TO PROVIDE
DOWNTOWN ACCESS THAT PROVIDE
ACCESS TO THE DOWNTOWN BIKEWAY
WITHIN ONE TO TWO BLOCKS OF ALL
DOWNTOWN LOCATIONS NOT EVERY
STREET NEEDS TO HAVE A HAVE A
REGISTERED ABILITY FACILITY
FOCUS ON CONNECTIONS INTO THE
DOWNTOWN AND CONNECTING TO THE
ADJACENT NEIGHBORHOODS.
SO IF YOU TAKE A LOOK AT THE AT
THE MAP TO THE RIGHT IN THE
CENTER IS THE CORE OF THE
DOWNTOWN AREA HERE ON GOING
THROUGH AND THE BIKEWAY FORMING
A BOX AROUND THE DOWNTOWN AREA
.
SO THE PROPOSAL IS TO TO EXTEND
THESE OUT INTO THE COMMUNITY TO
MAKE LOW, HIGH COMFORT , LOW
STRESS WAYS TO TO CONNECT IN
AND OUT OF THE BIKE NETWORK TO
THE MAJOR POPULATION AND
ACTIVITY CENTERS IN AND AROUND
THE DOWNTOWN AREA.
>> SO BUILDING
CONNECTED LOW
STRESS NETWORK AND ALLOWS US TO
BALANCE ACCESS AND COVERAGE
OF THE LOW STRESS NETWORK
THROUGH TO AND THROUGH DOWNTOWN
AND IT HAS MOSTLY RELIES ON
SEPARATED BIKEWAYS OR BIKE
BOULEVARD TREATMENTS.
IN THE CASE OF WEST WASHINGTON
THIS IS BEING PROPOSED LIKE WE
SAID MOST OF THE MOST OF THE
STREETS REQUIRE SOME SORT
OF SOME FORM OF SEPARATION DUE
TO THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE
TRAFFIC OPERATIONS IN THAT
AREA.
THE BICYCLE BOULEVARD IS AS
MUCH MORE A ROAD THAT IS
DESIGNED TO BE COMFORTABLE FOR
BICYCLE THROUGH TRIPS WHILE
TRYING TO DIVERT AND DIMINISH
THE AMOUNT OF THROUGH VEHICLE
TRIPS AND SO TRY TO KEEP IT
LOCAL AND SLOW AND LOW VOLUME.
>> THE BIKEWAY PROJECT
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THIS AS ARE
ENUMERATED HERE INCLUDING THE
BIKE AND I SHOULD MENTION WITH
LUCAS WANTING HAVE SPECIAL
ATTENTION PAID TO WHICH
OF THESE PROJECTS ARE IN THE
MARKET PLANNING PHASE AND WHICH
CAN REALLY HAVE TO HAVE SOME
LARGER FEEDBACK AS FAR AS THE
DIRECTION AND WISDOM
OF PROCEEDING WITH WITH WITH
THESE RECOMMENDATIONS VERSUS
THOSE THAT ARE EITHER ACTIVELY
IN CONSTRUCTION OR IN IN
DESIGN.
AND SO MOST OF THESE THAT
YOU'LL SEE ARE IN THE PLANNING
PHASE BUT YOU'LL SEE THAT
NOTATION GOING DOWN THE SIDE
THERE AND SO YOU HAVE THE
CATHERINE STREET BIKEWAY
EXTENSION THAT REACHES OUT
TOWARDS THE MEDICAL CAMPUS, THE
DIVISION BY HIGHWAY EXTENSION
THAT KICKS UP DIVISION THE
DIVISION STREET BIKEWAY HEADS
HEADS DOWN THE HILL TOWARDS THE
BROADWAY BRIDGE NEEDING A MUCH
MORE SAFE AND SECURE CONNECTION
THERE.
THE BROADWAY PLYMOUTH SIDE PATH
EXTENSION IS TO CONNECT TO THE
BROADWAY BRIDGE AND AND AND
PULL USERS ACROSS TO THE SIDE
IN A COMFORTABLE CIRCUMSTANCE.
THERE'S A RECOMMENDATION FOR A
SEVEN TWENTY ONE CONNECTOR THAT
THAT GOES ALONG THE LOW LYING
GROUND OF THE AREA UTILIZING
SOME CITY OWNED PROPERTY AT
SEVEN TWENTY ONE NORTH MAIN AND
CONNECTS OVER TO SUMMIT AND
THROUGH WHEELER PARK TO CONNECT
TO THE BORDER TO BOARD A TRAIL
AS WELL AS THE OTHER LIKELY
CONNECTIONS WASHINGTON STREET
BIKE BOULEVARD IS PROPOSED FOR
DESIGN AND TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
WITH A TWENTY TWENTY SIX
CONSTRUCTION AND MILLER BIKEWAY
EXTENSION IS UNDER.
>> WE'VE RECEIVED BIDS AND ARE
IN THE PROCESS OF COMING TO AN
AGREEMENT WITH A CONSTRUCTION
COMPANY TO CONSTRUCT THIS IN
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE IT'S HAD HAD
A PRESENTATION ON THE STATE
STREET BIKE IMPROVEMENTS AS
PART OF THIS STATEMENT OR NORTH
YOU STAND PROJECT AND THEY ARE
SAFE STREETS FOR ALL GRANT ARE
CONSIDERING SOME SEPARATION
TREATMENTS ON PACARD NORTHMEAD
MAIN CONNECTION SO REALLY
TRYING TO GO ALL THE WAY AROUND
THE CITY AND MAKE THESE
CONNECTIONS AND THESE ARE
OF COURSE ARE ALL IN THE EFFORT
FOR TRYING TO REDUCE VEHICLE
MILES TRAVELED TO ADD AN ALL
AGES ABILITIES NETWORK TO TO
REDUCE CODE TO MEET OUR SAFETY
GOALS MISSION ZERO TO COMPLETE
NEIGHBORHOODS AND SUPPORT A
THRIVING RESILIENT ECONOMY AND
CONTINUE TO INCREASE VISITORS
AND BIKEWAY USAGE NUMBERS
INVITING PEOPLE TO THE DOWNTIME
USING BIKES IN THE TRANSIT
COLUMN TRANSIT IMPORTANT TO THE
STUDY BECAUSE BECAUSE THE
GROWTH IN ANN ARBOR AND THE
NEED TO BE ABLE TO HOLD MORE
PEOPLE THROUGH OUR ROADWAYS AND
THE SIZE THAT THEY TRANSIT IS
GOING TO BE CRITICAL IN
COMPLETING THESE TRIPS AN
EFFICIENT WAY AND BUS TRAVEL
ISN'T AS COMPETITIVE AS DRIVING
FOR MORE MORE TRIPS WHEN IT
TAKES LONGER TO DRIVE AND SO
WE'RE WANTING TO INCREASE THE
QUALITY OF THE BUS, THE BUS
TRAVEL AND THE RELIABILITY
OF BUS TRAVEL.
SO AND AGAIN MANY PEOPLE DON'T
HAVE ACCESS TO A CAR DON'T USE
A CAR MORE THAN MORE THAN ONE
QUITE OFTEN OFTEN THINK AND SO
BY ADDING MORE PEOPLE TO TAKING
THE BUS IT INCREASES THE AMOUNT
OF SERVICE THAT IS OUT THERE
AND PROVIDE MORE ACCESS AND
OPPORTUNITIES NOT JUST FOR THE
PEOPLE TAKING THE BUS BUT FOR
THOSE THAT ARE MORE DEPENDENT
UPON THE BUS AND MORE TAKING
MORE PEOPLE TAKING THE BUS.
IT INCREASES OUR PHYSICAL AND
MENTAL HEALTH.
IT CREATES INVESTMENTS IN THE
LOCAL ECONOMY.
IT REDUCES CARBON EMISSIONS AND
IMPROVES ACCESS AND CHOICES FOR
ALL THE ROADS.
>> TRANSPORTATION ARE THE ROADS
TRANSIT PLAN IS PICTURED ON THE
RIGHT THERE IT IS ENVISIONS A
TRANSIT NETWORK OF TWENTY FORTY
FIVE WITH A LAYERED APPROACH TO
TO TRANSIT WITH BUS RAPID
TRANSIT INTENSITIES ALONG ALONG
WASHTENAW AND HURON AND JACKSON
AS WELL AS A NORTH SOUTH ONE
BEGINNING AT PLYMOUTH AND
ENDING DOWN IN STATE HAS
PRIORITY SERVICES WITH VERY
FREQUENT WITH HIGH FREQUENCIES
ALONG THESE EAST WEST AND NORTH
SOUTH THERE AS WELL AND THEN
ALSO HAS MORE HIGH FREQUENCY
SERVICE ROUTES GOING MORE INTO
THE OUTLYING AREAS.
BUT YOU CAN SEE HOW MUCH THEY
ALL TIE BACK INTO DOWNTOWN AND
THE IMPORTANCE OF MAKING
DOWNTOWN CONNECTIONS TO THE BUS
SERVICE IS CRITICAL TO THE
OVERALL OPERATIONS TO THE
BUSSES AS WELL AS PLANS TO
FURTHER INCREASE THE QUALITY
OF SERVICE TO BUS RAPID TRANSIT
.
SOME OF THE SOME OF THE TOOLS
WE'RE LOOKING AT TO INCREASE
BUS SERVICE IN THE DOWNTOWN
AREA ARE THINGS THAT WERE
MENTIONED IN THE PREVIOUS
CONVERSATION TRANSIT SIGNAL
PRIORITY OF A VARIETY OF OF
OF USES BUT TO BE ABLE TO
BETTER MORE RELIABLY MOVE THE
BUSSES THROUGH THE DOWNTOWN
AREA TRANSIT TO JUMP LANES WERE
DISCUSSED PREVIOUSLY IN THE
CONVERSATION.
GOT A GOOD DETAILED LOOK AT
THAT TRANSIT ONLY LANES THERE
WAS A SHORT QUEUE JUMP LANE
THAT'S TRANSIT ONLY TRYING TO
ENVISION WAYS TO TO MAKE A FULL
CONNECTION OF RELIABLE TRANSIT
BETWEEN DOWNTOWN ANN ARBOR AND
DOWNTOWN IPSI AS THE TOP
PRIORITY AS WELL AS TRANSIT
STOP ENHANCEMENTS.
>> AND THIS IS A PICTURE
OF DIVISION JUST NORTH OF HURON
AND THIS IS PROBABLY THE BEST
EXAMPLE OF THAT THAT SEPARATED
BUS DROP OFF SPACE WITH WITH
WITH A LANDING AREA AND THE
ABILITY TO GET ACROSS THE THE
BIKEWAY TO THE SIDEWALK.
SO AS FAR AS TRANSPORT
RECOMMENDS OVERALL WE'RE TRYING
TO PRESERVE SPEED STREET SPACE
FOR KEY TRANSIT CORRIDORS THAT
THE BOTH THE RIDE AS AND AND U
OF M HAVE IDENTIFIED AS BEING
CORRIDORS THAT THEY ARE WANTING
TO TO CONTINUE TO RUN AND RUN
MORE INTENSIVELY OVER TIME AS
WELL SHORT TERM OPERATIONAL
NEEDS FOR THE FOR THE BUS
SERVICE AND THE FIRST OF ALL
LOOKING AT THE PROJECTS THERE'S
THE ON STREET TRANSIT ONLY
LANES TRYING TO LOOK AT
DEDICATING SPACE IN THAT
DOWNTOWN AREA OR FOR TRANSIT
PRIOR TO MOVING THROUGH THE
HEROIN STREET CORRIDOR.
VERY LOTS AND LOTS OF DEMAND
FOR THAT SPACE THINKING THROUGH
HOW TRANSIT CAN BE THE PRIORITY
USER OF THAT OF SPACE.
THE FOURTH AVENUE TRANSIT
SIGNAL PRIORITY GETTING GETTING
BUSSES FROM THE DOWNTOWN
TRANSIT CENTER UP TO UP TO HERE
ON THROUGH SOME TRANSIT SIGNAL
PRIORITY PROGRESSING THEM UP TO
UP TO AND THROUGH HERE ON FIFTH
AVENUE TRANSIT SIGNAL PRIORITY
.
THIS COMES INTO PLAY WITH THE
POTENTIAL TO WAY CONVERSION
OF FIFTH AND DIVISION AND
THINKING THROUGH HOW BUSSES GET
TO THE TRANSIT CENTER FROM THE
NORTH.
THEY'RE USING FIFTH AVENUE
STAND PROJECT MAKE MAKES ITS
APPEARANCE HERE AGAIN AT NUMBER
FOUR ON NUMBER FOUR AND THE
GLENN FULLER Q Q JUMPS
RECOMMENDATION NUMBER FIVE OUT
THERE WOULD BE SIMILAR AND
APPLICATION TO THE STATE
STREET.
Q JUMP YOU EVENT PLANNING A
SECOND BUS HUB IN THE CENTRAL
CAMPUS AREA AND IN MASS AND ON
MADISON STREET ON NUMBER SIX
AND A POTENTIAL BROADWAY
TRANSIT ONLY LANE THE SECOND
PRIORITY FOR FOR THE EXPANDED
BUS SERVICE IS THE PLYMOUTH
CORRIDOR AND GETTING ACROSS THE
BROADWAY BRIDGE IS THE ONE
PINCH POINTS IN THAT CORRIDOR
AND WHY THESE ARE IMPORTANT
OF COURSE TRYING TO ACHIEVE
VISION ZERO BUS BUS RIDING IS
SAFER THAN AN AUTOMOBILE RIDING
AND USE THE REDUCTION OF VMT
AGAIN TRYING TO GET TRANSIT
SERVICES, PROVIDE CONVENIENT
OPTIONS FOR EVERYONE AND AS
WELL AS IMPROVED ACCESS
WAYFINDING AROUND THE DOWNTOWN
AREA.
>> ONCE YOU ONCE YOU ARRIVE
LOOKING AT THE STREET NETWORK,
WHAT ARE THE TOOLS USING HERE?
WE'RE LOOKING AT A TWO WAY
STREET RESTORATION'S SIMILAR TO
FIRST AND ACTUALLY LOOKING AT
FIFTH IN DIVISION.
>> THESE ARE MORE HIGH VOLUME
STREETS BUT STILL WANTED TO
THINK THROUGH WHAT THEY WOULD
LOOK LIKE AND WHAT AND WHAT
BENEFITS MIGHT COME WITH
CHANGING TO A TWO WAY
OPERATION.
OH I STOPPED CONVERSIONS.
WE'RE LOOKING SINGLE WARRANT
ANALYSIS TO SEE WHICH OF THE
TRAFFIC SIGNALS DOWNTOWN ARE
WORTH CONSIDERING MOVING TO TO
CHANGE ALWAYS STOPS SIGNAL
ENHANCEMENTS INCLUDING DOWNTOWN
PEDESTRIAN SIGNALS AND LEADING
PEDESTRIAN INTERVALS AND TIMING
ADJUSTMENTS FOR SAFETY ALONG
SIDE OF THE TWO WAY CONVERSION
AS WELL AS INTERSECTION
IMPROVEMENTS TO SHORTEN
CROSSING DISTANCES AND OTHER
THINGS.
>> BUT THE OPPORTUNITIES
PRESENT THEMSELVES AND HERE THE
STREET NETWORK RECOMMENDATIONS
THAT WE HAVE OUR FIRST OF ALL
THE FIRST AND SECOND ARE ARE
THE FIFTH AVENUE AND DIVISION
TO A RESTORATION WHICH ALSO
BRINGS IN NUMBER THREE BEEKS.
ALL THREE OF THESE KIND OF NEED
TO OPERATE TOGETHER TO MAKE
THIS MAKE THIS CONVERSION WITH
A POSSIBLE TWO WAY CONNECTION
BETWEEN AND THAT'S LESS AND
LESS CRITICAL TO THE OVERALL
FUNCTIONING OF THE TWO WAY
CONVERSION AND NUMBER FOUR, THE
INTERSECTION OF BEEKS DIVISION
AND BROADWAY TOGETHER IN THEIR
CURRENT CONFIGURATION WILL NOT
WORK DOESN'T WORK FOR THE
BIKEWAY, DOESN'T WORK FOR THE
TRANSIENT.
ONLY 19 DOESN'T FOR THE TWO
VERSIONS.
SO TRYING TO EXPLORE OPTIONS
FOR US AS SYMBOLIZATION
THAT
INTERSECTION AND A BETTER WAYS
FOR PEOPLE TO WALK AND BIKE IN
THAT AREA FEEL LESS FREE
FLOWING AND MORE AND LIKE A
FREEWAY INTERCHANGE THERE ARE
TWO INTERSECTIONS WE HAVE
IDENTIFIED THAT CURRENTLY HAVE
TRAFFIC SIGNALS THAT COULD BE
CONVERTED TO ALWAYS STOPS.
>> THOSE ARE AT LIBERTY AND
ASHLEY AND LIBERTY AND THOMPSON
A COUPLE OF OTHERS MET THE
WARRANTS BUT BECAUSE THAT THEY
WERE ON THE TRANSIT TRANSIT
SIGNAL OUR PRIORITY WE ARE
CONSIDERING THAT IT'S MORE
IMPORTANT TO HAVE THE
SIGNALIZATION THERE WITH THE
POTENTIAL FOR IMPROVING TRANSIT
OPERATIONS RATHER THAN TAKING
THOSE TO ALWAYS STOPS.
OF COURSE WHY THIS IS IMPORTANT
OR WANTING TO IMPROVE ACCESS TO
THE DOWNTOWN THROUGH WAYFINDING
NAVIGATION TOOLS WHERE I
SUPPORT LOCAL BUSINESSES,
ACHIEVE OUR SAFETY GOALS,
ACHIEVE OUR CARBON REDUCTION
VMT GOALS AND MAKE TRANSIT
CONVENIENT.
AND WHY DOES THAT TO A
CONVERSION HELP WITH SOME
OF THESE WITH SOME OF THESE
CONCERNS IT REDUCES THE THE
DOUBLE THREAT INTERACTION THAT
HAPPENS WHEN MULTIPLE LANES ARE
HEADING IN THE SAME DIRECTION
AS MORE VEHICLE THERE WILL BE
MORE VEHICLE PEDESTRIAN
CONFLICTS IN A TWO WAY SYSTEM
THAT WE'VE WE'VE SEEN ON FIRST
AND ASHLEY IS AS WELL MORE
POTENTIAL CONFLICTS BUT WE HAVE
NOT SEEN AN INCREASE IN SEVERE
INJURIES OR DEATH EITHER
REDUCTION OF TURNING MOVEMENTS
WITHIN THE NETWORK.
YOU NO LONGER NEED TO GO ONE
WAY AWAYS AND CIRCLE BACK
AROUND TO FIND YOUR
DESTINATION.
IT SHOULD REDUCE AMOUNT
OF TURNING AND SEARCHING AROUND
THE DOWNTOWN AREA AND OUR MODEL
SHOWED THAT THERE WILL BE AN
OVERALL REDUCTION IN SPEED WITH
THIS CONFIGURATION A TWENTY TO
TWENTY FIVE PERCENT REDUCTION
IN SPEED AND A CRASH REDUCTION
FACTOR AT THAT SPEED SPEEDS ARE
REDUCED THAT MUCH THEN WE WILL
GAIN A FIFTEEN PERCENT
REDUCTION.
IT MEANS BEING TRANSLATES INTO
SIGNIFICANT CRASH REDUCTION AND
SAFETY BENEFITS INCLUDING FORTY
FOUR PERCENT REDUCTION IN FATAL
CRASHES.
TWENTY TWO PERCENT REDUCTION IN
INJURY CRASHES AND FIFTEEN
REDUCTION IN PROPERTY CRASHES
REMAIN AND WE ARE AN TAKING ALL
OF THESE PROJECTS AND PUTTING
THEM TOGETHER INTO A A SYNCRO
MODEL PLATFORM TO BE ABLE TO
SEE HOW ALL OF THESE THINGS
WORK IN CONJUNCTION WITH EACH
OTHER MOSTLY TO TRY TO INCREASE
OUR UNDERSTANDING OF HOW
EVERYTHING WORKS TOGETHER.
A LOT OF CHANGE PROPOSED THIS.
SO CAN ALL THESE THINGS WORK?
CAN ALL VEHICLES THAT WANT TO
ENTER THE STREET NETWORK ENTER
THE STREET NETWORK?
IS THAT CUING INTO ADJACENT
INTERSECTIONS THAT IS THAT IS
CAUSED BY THESE CONFIGURATIONS
ARE THERE SPEED ARE SPEEDING
REDUCTIONS ANTICIPATED?
WE ALSO WANT TO KNOW THE THE
TYPE OF BENEFITS THAT WE SEE
OUT OF OUT OF THIS
RECONFIGURATION AND WE ALSO
UNDERSTAND THAT INCREASES IN
TRAVEL TIMES ALONG THESE
CORRIDORS WILL MOSTLY RELATE TO
BENEFITS AND REDUCTIONS
OF SPEEDS AND THE COMFORT OF
THE SPACE BECAUSE OF THE
REDUCTIONS IN SPEEDS AND ALSO
THE INCREASED SAFETY THAT COMES
WITH REDUCTIONS IN SPEEDS.
I'M GOING TO TURN OVER AGAIN TO
TO AMBER TO TALK ABOUT THE
INDUSTRY ENVIRONMENT AND THEN
WE'LL HAVE JUST A COUPLE
OF NEXT STEPS.
>> THANKS TREVOR.
SO THERE'S THIS ELEMENT OF THE
PLANNING HAS CHANGED A LITTLE
BIT SINCE YOU ALL SAW IT.
IF YOU REMEMBER THIS STARTED
OUT AS A FOCUS ON EVENT STS AND
WHEN WE WENT AND TALKED WITH
THE COMMUNITY IN MARCH THEY
PROVIDED SIGNIFICANT FEEDBACK
THAT WE REALLY NEEDED TO BE
THINKING BEYOND EVENT STREETS
AND JUST KIND OF BROADEN THAT
TO THE PEDESTRIAN REALM AND THE
STRONG PEDESTRIAN REALM WE KNOW
SUPPORTS SOCIAL CONNECTIONS AND
ECONOMIC STRENGTH.
WE SAW THAT IN SOME OF THE DATA
THAT I SHARED EARLY ON SUPPORT,
SAFETY AND ACCESSIBILITY AND
PROVIDES OPPORTUNITY FOR
RESILIENCE INFRASTRUCTURE AS
WELL.
>> AND THERE ARE A COUPLE
OF IMPROVEMENTS.
SO WE ARE LOOKING AT IN THIS
CATEGORY THREE OF THE DENHA CAN
TAKE THE LEAD ON IN TERMS
OF INFRASTRUCTURE INVESTMENTS.
SO THINGS LIKE FLEXIBLE STS
ENHANCED PUBLIC SPACES AND
PLACEMAKING AND WAYFINDING AND
THEN THERE'S ANOTHER IMPORTANT
ELEMENT HERE WHICH IS SEASONAL
STS INACTIVATION AND TREVOR
MENTIONED THE DOWNTOWN AREA
CESSATIONS.
WE HAVE FOUR DOWNTOWN AREA
ASSOCIATIONS IN OUR DOWNTOWN
AND THEY ARE THE ONES I LEAD
AND PROGRAM EVENTS AND SEASONAL
STREET CLOSURES.
>> SO JUST TO SHARE WITH YOU
SOME EXAMPLES OF FLEXIBLE
STREETS, THE LOCAL EXAMPLE THAT
WE HAVE IS THE KERBEL STREET ON
STATE STREET.
SO IN ADDITION TO CREATING
FLEXIBLE SPACES IT ALSO HELPS
TO CALM TRAFFIC AND CREATE A
NICE PEDESTRIAN ENVIRONMENT.
I THINK THE KIND OF KEY
OPPORTUNITY WE SEE FOR A
FLEXIBLE STREET AND OTHER
FLEXIBLE STREET IN DOWNTOWN IS
LIBERTY STREET CONNECTING MAIN
STREET AND STATE STREET EAST TO
WEST BUT ALSO OPPORTUNITY ON
STREETS LIKE WASHINGTON AND
MAINARD AS WELL
AND PUBLIC
PLAZA ENHANCEMENTS.
SO THIS ONE STRETCHING A BIT
BEYOND TRANSPORTATION NETWORK
BUT WE HEARD THIS WAS REALLY
IMPORTANT AN AREA TO BE
STRENGTHENED DOWNTOWN.
SO THIS IS REALLY MORE OF A
PARTNERSHIP WITH THE PARKS
DEPARTMENT AND WILL BE INCLUDED
IN OUR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
BUT IT IS AN IMPORTANT PART
OF THE PUBLIC REALM EXPERIENCE
IN DOWNTOWN SO WILL BE FOCUSING
ON THAT AS WELL AND WE HEARD
QUITE A BIT ABOUT WAS THE NEED
FOR IMPROVED PLACEMAKING AND
WAYFINDING ON SIDE STREETS AND
THE STREETS THAT LEAD FROM
PARKING STRUCTURES.
SO MAKING PARKING STRUCTURES
THEMSELVES LOOK NICER AND THEN
ALSO HAVING MORE OF AN ENGAGING
SIDEWALK EXPERIENCE CONNECTING
PARKING STRUCTURES TO SOME
OF OUR DESTINATION STREETS IN
DOWNTOWN.
>> YOU CAN SEE SOME EXAMPLES
THERE.
>> AND THEN LASTLY SEASONALE
STREETS AND ACTIVATION.
SO WE RECOGNIZE THAT WITH
SEASONAL STREET CLOSURES VERSUS
LIKE A THREE DAY WEEK CLOSURE
THERE IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
SOME OF THESE MORE LIKE
SEMI-PERMANENT PROGRAMING
ELEMENTS THAT CAN BE REALLY
ENGAGING FOR THE FULL
COMMUNITY.
AND WE ARE TALKING TO THE MAIN
STREET DISTRICT ABOUT THIS
ABOUT HOW THEY MIGHT BE
INTERESTED IN KIND OF ITERATING
THE SEASONAL CLOSURES THAT
THEY'VE BEEN HOSTING.
THEY ARE SERVING THEIR MEMBERS
TO TRY TO UNDERSTAND THAT MORE
AND THEN WE CAN BUILD
INFRASTRUCTURE TO HELP SUPPORT
THAT ACTIVATION.
THERE'S ALSO INTEREST IN THIS
ON WASHINGTON STREET AND AS I
MENTIONED LIBRES LIBERTY STREET
WE SEE AS KIND OF A CRITICAL
OPPORTUNITY FOR THIS BASED ON
THE EXISTING ACTIVITY ON THAT
STREET AND OUTSIDE OF THE MAIN
STREET AREA.
SOME OF THE OTHER NEIGHBORHOOD
DOWNTOWN ARE STARTING TO
EXPRESS INTEREST IN EXPLORING
THIS AS WELL.
SO THE STATE STREET DISTRICT IN
THE UNIVERSITY NEIGHBORHOOD IN
PARTICULAR
AND HERE ARE THE
RECOMMENDATIONS IN MAP REVIEW
AND ESSENTIALLY WE ARE
RECOMMENDING TOUCHING ALMOST
EVERY STREET IN THE DOWNTOWN
AND ENHANCING THE PEDESTRIAN
ENVIRONMENT.
SO YOU SEE THE FLEXIBLE STREET
IMPROVEMENTS THEY'RE
HIGHLIGHTED ON MAIN STREET
LIBERTY AND A COUPLE OF OTHERS
AND THEN WE HAVE THE
PLACEMAKING AND WAYFINDING
STREETS IDENTIFIED THE PUBLIC
SPACE ENHANCEMENTS, A PLACE
LIKE THE FARMER'S MARKET AND
LIBERTY PLAZA AND THEN
SEASONALE STREET AREAS FOR
CONSIDERATION AS WELL.
AND THIS RELATES BACK TO THOSE
VALUES THAT I SHARED AT THE
BEGINNING OF THIS ACTION TO THE
IMPORTANCE OF CREATING A
DOWNTOWN THAT IS WELCOMING TO A
DIVERSE COMMUNITY AND A
DOWNTOWN THAT'S ENGAGING AND
INTERESTING FOR ALL PEOPLE
LOOKING AT REAL QUICK AT NEXT
STEPS WE'RE SHARING THE STUDY
RECOMMENDATIONS WITH THE
BROADER PUBLIC AT THE OPEN
HOUSE ON NOVEMBER TWENTY THIRD
AT THE DOWNTOWN LIBRARY WE'RE
ALSO GOING TO RECOMMEND
ADOPTION AS PART OF THE DA'S
THIRTY YEAR DEVELOPMENT PLAN AS
WELL AS UPDATING UPDATES TO THE
MOVIE TOGETHER TOWARDS VISION
ZERO PLAN.
WE'RE STILL TALKING THROUGH
WHAT FORM THOSE UPDATES WOULD
BE AND WHAT WHAT WAY THE
RECOMMENDATIONS WILL BE PUT
FORWARD.
BUT THERE'S A THE INTENTION IS
TO UPDATE THE THINKING IN OUR
PLAN SO THE RECOMMENDATIONS
THAT ARE THAT ARE THOUGHT
THROUGH HERE HAVE A SOLID
GROUNDING TO MOVE FORWARD AND
PURSUE IMPLEMENTATION.
>> WE'RE ALSO PLANNING TO GO OH
SORRY I WAS JUST REALIZING WE
WE DIDN'T INCLUDE I KNOW WE
WANTED TO CIRCLE BACK TO THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION AFTER
THE OCTOBER ENGAGEMENT.
THAT'S NOT SHOWN ON THE SLIDE
HERE BUT THAT IS OUR PLAN AS
WELL INDEED WHAT WE WILL BE
BACK AFTER AFTER WE HEAR HEAR
FROM EVERYONE AGAIN AND
INCORPORATE THAT THAT
INFORMATION INTO INTO THE
RECOMMENDATIONS AND AND THE
PLAN.
AND SO THIS WILL BE NOT YOUR
YOU WILL HAVE OTHER ANOTHER
OPPORTUNITY TO TAKE A LOOK AT
THIS BEFORE BEFORE IT ADVANCES
AND WE'RE ALSO LOOKING LOOKING
FOR OPPORTUNITIES TO TO ADVANCE
THESE PROJECTS WHERE POSSIBLE
THROUGH THE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT
PLAN PROCESS AT THE CITY AND
PLEASE PLEASE PLEASE CONSIDER
SHOWING UP AND COMING OUT TO
THE OCTOBER 3RD PLANNING OPEN
HOUSE INCLUDES BOTH THE
DOWNTOWN AREA CIRCULATION STUDY
AND THE LAND USE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN.
AND SO PLEASE COME OUT AND TALK
TO TALK TO OTHERS THAT THAT ARE
SHOWING UP TO GET GET A SENSE
OF WHAT OF WHAT THEY THINK
ABOUT IT AND AND INCREASE THEIR
OWN FAMILIARITY.
>> GIVE US YOUR OWN FEEDBACK
AND AND PERSPECTIVE
.
THE THE MORE WE THE MORE WE
HEAR THE MORE WE CAN BUILD THE
BETTER WE CAN HONE OUR PLANS
FOR FOR DEVELOPING ARBOR IN THE
FUTURE AND SO THERE WILL BE
PIZZA THERE AND THERE WILL BE
PIZZA THERE.
>> WE WILL BUILD CURB YOUR YOUR
HUNGER AND WANT A GOOD TIME AND
SO THAT'S THAT'S OUR SHOW FROM
HERE.
LOOK I'M NOT SURE WHAT TIME WE
HAVE FOR QUESTIONS BUT WE'D BE
HAPPY TO ENTERTAIN FURTHER THIS
CONVERSATION.
>> YOU DEFINITELY HAVE TIME FOR
QUICK I'M SORRY READ I SHOULD
BE I SHOULD HAVE BEEN
ADDRESSING YOU.
MY APOLOGIES IF YOU RAISE YOUR
HAND OR OR SPEAK KIND
OF QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS AND
PEOPLE HAVE MAYBE WHAT PEOPLE
ARE THINKING JUST ON YOUR
PREVIOUS SLIDE THERE'S GOING TO
BE A PROPOSAL YOU SAID TO
UPDATES TO THE OUR
COMPREHENSIVE TRANSPORTATION
PLAN.
WHAT WHAT FORM DO YOU SEE THAT
COMING IN RECOMMENDED UPDATES?
THAT'S THAT'S A PLAN THAT WAS
APPROVED BY US AND THEN ADOPTED
BY CITY COUNCIL.
SO I'M JUST CURIOUS WHAT YOU'RE
THINKING THERE.
>> WE'RE STILL PLAYING AROUND
WITH SOME OF THE THINGS THAT
SEEM PERTINENT TO IT WOULD BE
ARTICULATING THAT WE'RE AIMING
FOR AN ALL AGES AND ABILITIES
NETWORK IN THE DOWNTOWN AREA
THAT PUTS PEOPLE WITHIN BLOCK
OR TWO OF A LOW
COMFORT FACILITY RATHER THAN
EVERY BLOCK BECAUSE QUITE
LITERALLY OUR PLAN HAS US
ADVANCING BY FACILITIES AT
EVERY BLOCK A SUPPORT FOR
ADVANCING TRANSIT PRIORITY
IMPROVEMENTS IN THE AREAS THAT
WE'RE LOOKING TO TO ADVANCE
THAT WILL AID US AND ADVANCING
THOSE INCLUDING DISCUSSIONS
WITH M DOT AS M DOT IS
CONSIDERING WHAT TO WHAT TO DO
WITH WASHTENAW AND WE'RE ALSO
HAVING CONVERSATIONS WITH THEM
ABOUT POTENTIALLY TAKING OVER
JURISDICTION OVER OVER THE
STATE ROADWAYS AS WELL.
AND SO TRYING TO GET SOME SOME
POLICY LEVEL CHANGES IN AS WELL
AS I'M NOT SURE HOW MUCH WE
WOULD OR IN WHAT FORM WE WOULD
ADVANCE THE PROJECT LEVEL INTO
THE PLAN BUT PROBABLY TRY TO
KEEP IT AT THE LEVEL THAT THE
PLAN CURRENTLY IS WHICH IS MORE
OF A THERE ARE PRINCIPLES AND
CONCEPTS AND THEN AND THEN A
SEPARATE IDEA ABOUT HOW ABOUT
HOW THEY ARE APPLIED AND
DEVELOPED OUTSIDE OF IT BUT NOT
TRY TO BE TOO PRESCRIPTIVE.
THE ONE, TWO, THREE, FOUR AS
FAR AS PROJECTS GO IN IN THE
PLAN UPDATE ANYWAY I HOPE I'M
NOT TALKING OUT OF TURN ABOUT
THAT.
I'M THE TRANSPORTATION TEAM
WILL BE IS IN DISCUSSIONS ABOUT
THIS AND ABOUT HOW TO HOW TO
MOVE THIS FORWARD IN A WAY THAT
IS MOST CONGRUENT WITH THE
PLAN.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU, PETER.
SO THANKS FOR THAT GREAT
MEETING.
THERE WAS SO MUCH EXCELLENT
INFORMATION IN THERE THAT WAS
REALLY, REALLY GOOD.
BUT THERE'S TWO THINGS I WANT
TO COMMENT ON AND ONE OF THEM
AS YOU JUST MENTIONED ABOUT
TAKING CONTROL OF THE TRUNK
LINES BACK FROM DOTTI.
I JUST WANT TO REITERATE
SUPPORT FOR THAT SO THAT WE CAN
REALIZE ALL OF THESE GREAT
PLANS.
TO ME THAT SEEMS LIKE AN
IMPORTANT ENABLER SO THAT WE
CAN OWN OUR OWN DESTINY FOR THE
CHANGES WE WANT TO SEE IN
DOWNTOWN AND OTHER PLACES
THROUGHOUT THE CITY.
THE OTHER IDEA THAT I LIKE SO
MUCH I WANT TO COMMENT ON WAS
THE SEASONAL THE SEASONAL
STREET CLOSURES.
I GUESS WE SHOULDN'T CALL THEM
STREET CLOSURES OR THE THE
SEASONAL EVENTS STREETS.
I THINK THAT'S A GREAT IDEA.
I WOULD LIKE TO SEE THEM OPEN
FOR EVENTS FOR PEDESTRIANS FOR
LONGER STRETCHES AT A TIME
BECAUSE I I PREFER HAVING THEM
THAT WAY FIRST OF ALL.
BUT I ALSO PREFER THE
CONSISTENCY.
I DON'T LIKE IT CHANGING BACK
AND FORTH SO I'D LIKE TO SEE IT
BE CONSISTENTLY OPEN FOR THOSE
EVENTS AND PEDESTRIANS FOR LIKE
THE SUMMER MONTHS OR THE WARM
MONTHS OR SOMETHING LIKE THAT
INSTEAD OF INSTEAD OF ON AGAIN
OFF AGAIN BUT ANYWAYS THANKS
AGAIN AND THANKS FOR ALL THESE
THE GREAT UPDATES IN.
THANK YOU FOR THOSE COMMENTS
MEGHAN.
>> YEAH THANKS.
THIS IS GREAT TO LOOK REALLY
FORWARD LOOKING PRESENTATIONS
NIGHT WHICH IS AWESOME.
>> I'M JUST GOING TO POINT OUT
THAT I REALLY LIKED YOUR
FRAMING AROUND LIKE CHOICE
OF TRANSIT MODE.
>> I THINK THIS IS LIKE HOW I
TRIED TO TALK THROUGH IT WITH
SKEPTIC'S BEFORE AND I GUESS I
DON'T KNOW IF YOU HAVE AN
ANSWER TO THIS YET BUT I'M
CURIOUS TO HEAR IF YOU FEEL
LIKE THAT RESONATES WITH LIKE
YOU KNOW, THE EVERYDAY PERSON
BECAUSE IT DEFINITELY RESONATED
WITH ME WHEN I STARTED GETTING
INTO BIKING.
BUT YEAH, I JUST I REALLY LOVE
THAT FRAMING AND I THINK THAT'S
SIMILAR TO WHAT PETER SAID
ABOUT FRAMING IT IS LIKE HAVING
STREETS AND WHAT AMBER WAS
SAYING, YOU KNOW, FRAMING IS
LIKE IN A POSITIVE WAY I THINK
IS REALLY IMPORTANT.
SO THANK YOU FOR THE
PRESENTATION.
THE DATA ESPECIALLY WAS REALLY
EXCITING.
SO THIS IS GREAT.
THANK YOU.
THOSE FIRST FIRST FEW SLIDES
LIKE HER ON SLIDE TEN TWELVE
SOMETHING TO SHOW YOU THE DATA
NOW THAT THESE THINGS WE'VE
BEEN DOING A LOT OF THESE
THINGS FOR YEARS NOW AND THE
TWO WAY IMPLEMENTATION ON FIRST
NATIONALLY FOR FEW YEARS NOW
IT'S SO VALUABLE TO BE ABLE TO
DETERMINE WHERE WE GO IN THE
FUTURE AND JUST IN
CONVERSATIONS I MEAN AS YOU
KNOW, PEOPLE KNOW THAT I'M ON
THE PHONE THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION, THEY COME UP AND
HAVE AN ANECDOTE OR TWO WHICH
IS YOU KNOW, OR SOMETHING BUT
IT'S MUCH MORE IMPORTANT TO
HAVE DATA LIKE THIS.
I REALLY I REALLY VALUE THAT.
I ALSO AM EXCITED TO SEE THAT
YOU GUYS ARE LOOKING AT
CHANGING SOME SIGNALIZED
INTERSECTIONS OF WHERE WE
STOPPED.
I THINK THAT COULD REALLY BE
USEFUL FOR COMMON STREETS.
THERE JUST SEEMS TO BE SUCH AN
EPIDEMIC OF DRIVERS ANTICIPATE
A RED LIGHT OR THINKING IT
RELATES TO SEEING A YELLOW AND
JUST YOU KNOW, PUT TO THE
FLOOR.
THEY'RE JUST SO TERRIFIED
OF HAVING TO WAIT AT A RED
LIGHT THEY JUST BLOW THROUGH
ALL THEM AND SPEED UP AND JUST
ALL KINDS CRAZY BEHAVIOR AROUND
LIGHTS AND I THINK WHERE WE
STOP SO MAYBE MORE LIKELY TO BE
SUCCESSFUL IN CERTAIN
SITUATIONS THAT YOU GUYS I KNOW
YOU'RE WORKING ON IDENTIFYING.
SO I REALLY BELIEVE THAT EFFORT
THAT YOU'RE DOING THERE AND I
HOPE THAT THERE'S MORE THAN
JUST TWO THAT COULD BE
CONSIDERED CANDIDATES FOR THAT.
LIKE I'M THINKING FOR THE
MICHIGAN THEATER THAT THREE WAY
STOP I FEEL MUCH MORE
COMFORTABLE CROSSING THERE THAN
THE SIGNALIZED STOPS THAT ARE
KIND OF AROUND THAT LIKE A
THOMPSON OR STATE STREET AND
STUFF.
SO THAT'S JUST ONE EXAMPLE.
>> OTHER QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS
.
BUT AGAIN JOIN YOU IN GIVING A
PLUG FOR NEXT WHAT DOES IT NEXT
THURSDAY EVENING OR NEXT
WEDNESDAY I THINK IS ON A
WEDNESDAY.
IT'S WEDNESDAY SHOWING UP THE
WRONG DAY WEEK FROM TODAY.
>> I KNOW ONE OF OUR KIDS AS A
PARENT TEACHER CONFERENCE THE
AND WE'RE GOING TO TRY TO MAKE
IT THERE AT SOME POINT THAT BUT
I KNOW YOU'LL BE COMING BACK TO
THE COMMISSION AFTER THAT AT
SOME POINT TO TO SHARE THOSE
FINDINGS.
>> SO AND INDEED WE'LL BE THERE
ALL DAY.
PLEASE PLEASE COME OUT WHEN
IT'S CONVENIENT FOR YOU IF YOU
CAN IF YOU HAVE THE INTEREST
AND WE'RE LOOKING FORWARD TO
PRESENTING THIS OUT TO THE
PUBLIC AND AND GETTING ANOTHER
ANOTHER ROUND OF FEEDBACK AND
THE LAST TIME THROUGH WHERE
THEY PUT SOME WIND BEHIND SOME
OF THESE PROPOSALS AND SO WE'RE
HOPING THAT WE GET A SIMILAR
LEVEL OF OF INSPECTION AND
THOUGHTFULNESS AT THIS AT THIS
ONE.
THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
READY TO MOVE ON?
YEP.
OK, STAFF REPORT AND UPDATES.
SO WE RECEIVED A STAFF REPORT
PROVIDING PROJECT UPDATES WITH
OUR AGENDA MATERIALS.
SO LOOK, IF YOU WOULDN'T MIND
YOUR DOING THAT.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
UH, THAT'S WHAT ARE WRAPPING UP
THE CONSTRUCTION SEASON.
WE DO NOT REALLY HAVE AN UPDATE
ON THE CURRENT CONSTRUCTION
PROJECTS MOVING ON TO OTHER
PROJECTS CURRENTLY IN THE
DESIGN AND THE PLANNING STAGE
FOR SIDEWALK GAP PROJECTS
INDEPENDENCE THERE IS WORK
WHILE STAFF IS PREPARING FOR
PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT IN NOVEMBER
OF THIS YEAR BARTENDS I'VE SAID
TO AQAB THERE WAS A PUBLIC
MEETING TO INTRODUCE THE THE
PROJECT TO RESIDENTS AND THERE
WAS Q AND THEY DOCUMENT IT WILL
BE POSTED ON THE CITY WEB PAGE
WAS AVAILABLE CONSTRUCTION
CURRENTLY SCHEDULED FOR TWENTY
TWENTY SIX BROCKMANN.
THE CRESTLINE POWER MEETING AND
WALK THROUGH WAS HELD EARLIER
IN OCTOBER AND Q AND THEY
DOCUMENT HIS SIMILAR STATUS AS
BARTON DRIVE BACK TO FIVE FOR
THIS ONE SIDEWALK WILL BE
INSTALLED ON ONE SIDE OR THE
OTHER THROUGHOUT THIS PART
OF THE AREA A PUBLIC MEETING
AND A WALK THROUGH WAS HELD
ALSO OR EARLIER IN OCTOBER AND
A Q&A DOCUMENT WILL BE PREPARED
AND POSTED ON THE WEB PAGE.
CONSTRUCTION IS ALSO SCHEDULED
FOR TWENTY SIX.
WE HAD THE DISCUSSION OR
PRESENTATION TODAY FOR STATE
STREET.
THERE'S NO UPDATE TO THE NIXON
ROAD ROUNDABOUT CONSTRUCTION
AND BUT THERE WAS SOME EMAIL
CORRESPONDENCE REGARDING LOGAN
CLAG AND THE STREET
DESIGN
NIXON THERE'S NO UPDATE
APPALLING WATERMANN RESURFACING
,FIFTH AVENUE RESURFACING.
THERE'S NO UPDATE FOR THIS
MONTH AND THEN WE WILL BRING
THAT PRODUCT TO THE COMMISSION
TO INTRODUCE THE ALTERNATIVE
LANE USE FOR FAF AND THAT WE
JUST TALK ABOUT DOWNTOWN AREA
CIRCULATION STUDY AND THE NEXT
ONE GOING TO ALL OF THAT DETAIL
IS THE TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
MISCELLANEOUS UTILITIES
PROJECT.
THIS ONE IS SCATTERED THROUGH
TO OUR THREE SPOTS.
THE FIRST ONE IS IN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD.
THERE ARE TWO STREETS INVOLVED
GLASS AND ASKED AND WORRY AND
THE WELL WITHIN AND THE SECOND
LOCATION IS HARDING, HARDING
AND WALLINGFORD AND THE THIRD
LOCATION IS FIFTH AVENUE.
SO RIGHT NOW THERE'S NO STAFFY
HAVE IT EXTEN REVIEW AS TO ALL
THESE LOCATIONS AS TO
INTEGRATING TRAFFIC CALMING
MEASURES INTO A CAPITAL PROJECT
DESIGN.
SO FAR THERE'S NO PROPOSE NO
CHANGE TO GLASTONBURY OR WALTIN
FOR HARDING AND A WARNING FOR
STAFF RECEIVED FEEDBACK
REGARDING ALTERNATIVE
INTERSECTION DESIGN.
THAT INTERSECTION AND STAFF IS
CURRENTLY STILL WORKING ON THE
FINAL DESIGN AND WILL ENGAGE
PUBLIC AND RESIDENTS FIFTH
AVENUE.
RIGHT NOW STAFF IS LOOKING AT
ADDING BICYCLE FACILITIES AS
PART OF THE FIFTH AVENUE
RESURFACING PROJECT IN THE
OTHER UPDATES AND INFORMATION
GROUP FOR MICRO MOBILITY,
SPAINS RUN AWAY USE CONTRACT.
IT WAS RENEWED BY CITY COUNCIL
FOR THREE MONTHS IN JUNE
OF THIS YEAR AND BY
ADMINISTRATION ACTION IT WAS
EXTENDED FOR ANOTHER THREE
MONTHS IN EARLY SEPTEMBER
OF THIS YEAR TO GIVE ADDITIONAL
TIME FOR COUNCIL TO DISCUSS
ADDITIONAL SAFETY EXPECTED
ACTIONS AND WHAT TO INCLUDE NO
LONGER AGREEMENT ON THE ANDAT
COORDINATION FRONT THERE ARE
SOME ACTIONS ABOUT U.S. 23
IMPROVEMENT PROJECT FOR THIS
ONE THERE ARE ALTERNATIVES FOR
THE US TWENTY THREE AND THE
WASHTENAW AVENUE INTERCHANGE
THAT ARE UNDER CONSIDERATION
AND I WILL HOLD AN OPEN HOUSE
AND A SLIGHT UPDATE OFFER.
THIS MEMO IS PREPARED.
THE UPPER HOUSE IS NOW
SCHEDULED TO BE OCTOBER 21ST AT
WASHTENAW COMMUNITY COLLEGE
SAME TIME AND UNIVERSITY OF OUR
REGIONAL OFFICE HAS STARTED AN
ACTIVE TRANSITION UPDATE.
SO THEY'RE VERY THEY HAVE THE
ENGAGEMENT PAGE AND SURVEY
AVAILABLE AT THIS LINK.
PUBLIC SERVICE IS AVAILABLE ON
THE WEBSITE AND IT'S GOING TO
CLOSE BY THE END OF THIS MONTH.
WE DO NOT HAVE AN UPDATE TO
REPORT ABOUT YOU ABOUT SMART
INTERSECTION PROJECT IN THE IN
THE BACKGROUND THOUGH THE
HOTPOINT STATION CONTINUES IN
THE PROJECT THERE IS NO UPDATE
FROM THE OFFICE
OF SUSTAINABILITY AND
INNOVATION THIS MONTH AND FOR
STREETLIGHT IMPLEMENTATION
DEATHY HAS REPORTED FIXING A
TOTAL OF EIGHT HUNDRED NINETY
NINE STREETLIGHTS SO FAR IN
THIS CALENDAR YEAR THERE WAS A
REQUEST TO PROVIDE A STATUS
UPDATE TO THE MALIKAI LANE CITY
STREET ROEDAD EVALUATION SO
THAT ONE THERE IS FUNDING
AVAILABLE FOR THE CURRENT
FISCAL YEAR TO CONDUCT THE
EVALUATION BASED ON PREVIOUS
DISCUSSION AND SCOPE.
THE CURRENT LEVEL FUNDING WOULD
NOT COVER ALL THE CORRIDORS
INCLUDED SO STAFF IS WORKING ON
A REVISED PROPOSAL AND TRYING
TO BALANCE WHAT WE CAN INCLUDE
IN THIS REQUEST FOR PROPOSAL.
WE'RE ALSO ADDING BACKING TO
THIS UPDATE THE STATUS ABOUT
NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC CALMING.
THIS SECTION DOES HAVE A LOT
OF HIGHLIGHT.
SO THE FIRST GROUP IS THE FIRST
BOUNDARIES TRAFFIC AND PROJECTS
THAT HAVE BEEN APPROVED BY CITY
COUNCIL.
SO THESE THESE ONES ARE LINED
OUT FOR CONSTRUCTION.
THOSE ARE THE FIRST OF FOUR
COLOR GREEN LIGHT YELLOW THOSE
MANCHESTER BERG HENRY AND
ARADA, THEY ARE THE
CONSTRUCTION IS EXPECTED EITHER
FOR THE REMAINDER OF THIS YEAR
OR AFTER WE CROSS INTO THE NEW
YEAR IN TWENTY TWENTY FIVE.
THEN THERE ARE TWO PROJECTS
SLATED FOR CONSTRUCTION IN
TWENTY TWENTY SIX.
THOSE ARE MACHOL AND WARTON
THERE IS THIS PROJECT ON TRAVER
IT'S IT HAS BEEN APPROVED BY
CITY COUNCIL BUT RIGHT NOW THE
CONSTRUCTION IS ON HOLD AND THE
REASON IS TO SCHEDULE AT THIS
CONSTRUCTION TO BE SIMULTANEOUS
WITH SEVERAL OTHER UTILITIES
PROJECT AND TRAILER FOR WATER
MAIN AND THE RESURFACING THEN
WE ARE HAVING A FAIRLY LONG
LIST OF PETITIONS THAT NEED TO
BE REVIEWED AND WORKING OFF
THIS YEAR'S BUDGET AVAILABLE TO
TO HAVE A BALANCE OF TAKING
CARE OF CONSTRUCTION AND ALSO
PROCESS THE PETITIONS.
WE HAVE A ROOM TO PROCESS THREE
PETITIONS AND THOSE ARE KAMAHL
STREET, BRANDYWINE AND THE
AVENUE EVALUATION FOR THESE
THREE PETITIONS ARE EXPECTED TO
START IN THIS YEAR FOR BIKE
CORPS PILOT PROGRAM.
BUT ALTHOUGH FOR BIKE PARKING
PILOTS WHERE HE INSTALLED
OUTSIDE OF THE VEHICLE BOUNDARY
IS A BOUNDARY THERE WERE
ALREADY THREE LOCATIONS
INSTALLED AND MOVING ON TO SAFE
STREET FOR ALL GRANT STAFF
CONTINUE TO WORK ON BOTH THE
NEAR MISS ANALYTICS TASK AND
QUICK BUILD AND SPEED
MANAGEMENT TASK STAFF HAD
ANOTHER DISCUSSION WITH FEDERAL
HIGHWAY EARLIER THIS MONTH TO
DISCUSS ABOUT THEIR REQUIREMENT
FOR NEPA ENVIRONMENTAL
CLEARANCE AND FOR THE THE
PROCESS OF RELEASING FUNDS FOR
CONSTRUCTION SO STAFF IS STILL
WORKING WITH FEDERAL HIGHWAY ON
THAT AND WE'LL HAVE MORE DETAIL
TO REPORT.
WE DO NOT HAVE ANY UPDATE IN
THESE OTHER CATEGORIES FOR BIKE
PARKING COVID REDUCTION PROGRAM
BOARD ENCOURAGEMENT AND
DUCATION.
THEN WE COME TO THE SECTION
WHERE WE REPORT THE FLASHING
YELLOW ARROW OPERATIONS AND HOW
AND HAVING THE FEATURE TURNED
OUT TO HAVE PEDESTRIAN
ACTUATION TO CANCEL FLASHING
YELLOW ARROW.
SO IN THIS MONTH STAFF CONTINUE
TO WORK ON OUR FORCE AND STAFF
HAS GOT TO REPORT THAT OUR
SIGNAL IS ELSWORTH ARE NOW
CONVERTED OVER SO THAT
PEDESTRIAN ACTIVATION WILL
CANCEL THE FLASHING ARROW
SIGNAL INDICATION THERE ARE
SOME DETAILS AND STAFF IS
GAINING ON OUR KNOWLEDGE ALONG
THE WAY, WORKING THOSE DETAILS
OUT AND WILL CONTINUE TO
ADDRESS THE REMAINING ITEMS ON
THE NEXT GROUP FOR THIS MONTH
WE THE REPORT FOR REPORTED
CRASHES INVOLVING BICYCLISTS
AND PEDESTRIANS THAT REPORT IS
NOT AVAILABLE SO WE'LL PRESENT
TOGETHER IN NEXT MONTH'S
MEETING.
WE DO HAVE ONE FOLLOW UP FOR
PATTERN HILL.
THERE WAS A SERIOUS INJURY
CRASH REPORT AT THAT LOCATION
AND WE RECEIVED THE REQUEST TO
MAKE THE IMPROVEMENT TO ADDRESS
THE SKEWNESS OF THE
INTERSECTION OR I SHOULD SAY
THE THE THE SIDE THE EFFECT
OF ROAD USERS BEING ABLE TO SEE
SIGNAL INDICATIONS ON THE
CROSSING STREET BECAUSE OF THE
SKEWNESS.
SO STAFF PROCURED FOR LOUVERS
ON THE PEDESTRIAN SIGNALS AND
ALL EIGHT PEDESTRIANS SIGNAL
HEADS ARE NOT EQUIPPED WITH
GOOBER'S AIR AND THAT WRAPS UP
THE PRATA UPDATE BACK TO
HOT-AIR.
THANK PETER.
THANKS LUKE.
THAT'S A GREAT UPDATE.
THANKS FOR THE INFORMATION ON
PACARD AND HEALTH TOO.
I'M GLAD THAT THAT GOT TAKEN
CARE OF SO QUICKLY.
CAN WE ADD THE JACKSON ROAD
CROSSWALKS TO THAT?
I THOUGHT THAT WE HAD RECENTLY
SORT OF BROKEN A LOGJAM WITH
THEM DUTY AND THE AND BUT THAT
WAS MOVING.
HOW LONG IS IT AT WHAT POINT
WOULD WE SEE IT ON THIS
DOCUMENT THIS DOCUMENT IF THERE
IS NO UPDATES SOMETIMES
JUST
TAKING OFF FOR THAT MONTH AND
AS SOON AS WE HAVE AN UPDATE
IT'S GOING TO COME BACK SO FOR
THAT ONE WE'RE STILL WORKING AS
MICHIGAN GOKEY TO TO RECEIVE TO
WORK TOWARD RECEIVING OUR
APPROVAL ON THE CONSTRUCTION
PERMIT SO YEAH, THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
LET'S MOVE ON THEN TO LIAISON
REPORTS UNNIKRISHNAN WHO
SPECIFICALLY SERVE AS A LIAISON
TO ANOTHER BODY OR ORGANIZATION
ARE INVITED TO PROVIDE REPORTS
AND UPDATES
THEIR SALARIES BACK
ON ATTENDEES LIST.
I'M NOT SURE IF HE NEEDS TO BE
BROUGHT IN AS A PANELIST OR IF
THEY HAVE ANYTHING TO SAY HERE.
BUT MAKE SURE
YEP YEP.
HAD TO HIT A BUTTON ON MY
HEADPHONES THERE WAY I WENT TO
CALL BACK BUT I HAVE NO UPDATES
CURRENTLY I DID HAVE A QUESTION
BUT I THINK IT'S TOO LATE.
I'LL PROBABLY ASK IT ON THAT
PARTICULAR QUESTION.
>> WELL I WAS JUST MY MY
CONCERN WITH THE THE DOWNTOWN
IS WHAT I WANTED THEM TO KEEP
IN TO CONSIDERATION FOR THE
DOWNTOWN PLAN WAS SIDEWALKS,
PEDESTRIAN SAFETY ON SIDEWALKS
AND IN PARTICULAR IT WAS FOR
BIKE USERS WHO DECIDED THEY
WANT TO USE THE SIDEWALKS
INSTEAD OF THE BIKE LANE.
>> I'VE HAD MANY RUN INS WITH
BIKES COMING UP ON SNEAKING UP
ON ME SOME THAT DON'T SAY
ANYTHING AND IT JUST YOU KNOW,
THAT IS A BIT OF A PROBLEM.
BUT I SEE THAT DOWNTOWN A LOT.
THANKS TREVOR IS DYLAN SO HE'S
LIKE TO SEE I'M WRITING THAT
DOWN RIGHT NOW SO THANK YOU
VERY MUCH ANOTA.
>> THANK WELL THANK YOU.
>> ALL RIGHT.
MOVING ON TO COMMISSION MEMBER
COMMUNICATION CITY
COMMISSIONERS THE BUDGET TO
PROVIDE REPORTS AND UPDATES ON
ANYTHING PETER.
HI.
SO UM LET ME SEE.
>> I GOT SOME NOTES HERE
RECENTLY WE'VE BEEN EXPOSED TO
SOME DESIGN PROPOSALS FOR AAPS
NEW SCHOOL BUILDINGS AND I
GUESS I'M I'M NOT SATISFIED
WITH THEIR TRANSPORTATION
CHOICES THAT THEY'RE MAKING FOR
THESE NEW BUILDINGS.
LOTEN WHICH IS IN MY
NEIGHBORHOOD IS A GOOD EXAMPLE
.
THE PLANS THAT WE SAW PUBLISHED
IN NY SHOW THAT ALL OF THE
EXISTING LOTEN AAPS PARCEL THAT
ISN'T OCCUPIED BY THE NEW
SCHOOL BUILDING ENDS UP BEING
DEVOTED TO DRIVE LANES AND
PARKING LOTS IN THIS NEW
PROPOSED LAYOUT, THE PLAY AREA
FOR THE KIDS WOULD HAVE TO BE
ON THE ADJACENT PARK BECAUSE
ALL THE REST OF THE SPACE IS
TAKEN UP WITH UM CAR
INFRASTRUCTURE.
SO AS IT RELATES TO THIS GROUP
,I MEAN I UNDERSTAND THAT THE
CITY DOESN'T HAVE ANY DIRECT
AUTHORITY OVER AAPS BUT WE
SHOULD HAVE A PARTNERSHIP TYPE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THESE TWO
ENTITIES IN OUR COMMUNITY AND
ONE OF THE WAYS THAT THE CITY
NEEDS THE SUPPORT AAPS IS BY
COLLABORATING ON THESE
PROPOSALS, ESPECIALLY AS IT
RELATES TO TRANSPORTATION AND
GETTING PEOPLE TO SCHOOL.
SO WE ESPECIALLY NEED TO MAKE
SURE THAT APS IS PURSUING PLANS
THAT ARE ALIGNED WITH OUR
COMMUNITIES GOALS LIKE VISION
ZERO CARBON NEUTRALITY AND
UNFORTUNATELY WHAT I'VE SEEN SO
FAR THE NEW BUILDING PROPOSALS
JUST ARE NOT ALIGNED WITH THOSE
IDEALS.
>> SO WHAT I HAVE SEEN IS THAT
THEY'RE PRIORITIZING CAR TRAVEL
,THE DESIGN OF THE GROUNDS AND
THE STRUCTURES MAKE IT OBVIOUS
THAT THE WAY PEOPLE ARE
EXPECTED TO ARRIVE AT SCHOOL BY
CAR NOT BY FOOT OR BY BIKE.
SO AAPS I THINK IS ATTEMPTING
TO FIX TRAFFIC CONGESTION AND
THESE OVERUSED PICK UP AND DROP
OFF LANES BY DOUBLING DOWN AND
ADDING MORE OF THEM.
THE STRATEGY IS GOING TO INDUCE
DEMAND AND INCREASE CONGESTION
BY ENCOURAGING PEOPLE TO DRIVE
AND DISCOURAGING PEOPLE FROM
WALKING AND RIDING BIKES AMONG
ALL THIS NEW CAR TRAFFIC.
SO I GUESS MY MY I THOUGHT THAT
THE CITY SHOULD NOT BE ENABLING
THE SCHOOL DISTRICT TO WE
SHOULDN'T BE ENABLING THESE BAD
DECISIONS BY GIVING OVER
PARKLAND THAT LAWN OR ANYWHERE
ELSE SO THAT APES CAN SUPERSIZE
THEIR SUPERSIZE THEIR DRIVE
LANES.
AND BEFORE OUR NOVEMBER MEETING
I GUESS I'M PLANNING ON WORKING
WITH ERIKA AND OTHER PEOPLE IN
THE COMMUNITY TO FIND THE RIGHT
WAY TO SHARE THAT MESSAGE WITH
APES AND WITH THE COMMUNITY SO
THAT WE CAN PARTNER WITH THEM
IN A WAY THAT MAKES TRANSPORT
TO SCHOOL SAFE AND ALIGNED WITH
OUR COMMUNITY VALUES.
SO I'D LIKE TO BRING SOMETHING
BACK FOR THIS BODY TO EVALUATE
AND HOPEFULLY TO IMPROVE UM IN
NOVEMBER AND WE CAN TALK MORE
ABOUT THAT BETWEEN NOW AND THEN
BUT SO GREAT.
THANKS.
I APPRECIATE THAT.
WILL WE HAVE OUR AGENDA SETTING
MEETING COMING UP HERE IN A
COUPLE WEEKS AND I WILL IT'S
BEEN A LONG STANDING DESIRE TO
COMMIT TO TO HAVE A SPECIAL
SCHOOL ORIENTED MEETING.
YOU KNOW, I THINK WHAT YOU'RE
TALKING ABOUT HERE JUST
RATCHETS THAT DESIRE UP EVEN
MORE SO
AMERICA AND THE
COMMUNITY AT LARGE PUT TOGETHER
AND YEAH, WE'LL SEE WHERE THAT
GOES.
LOOKING FORWARD TO THAT NO ONE
ELSE.
ALL RIGHT.
COVER AGENDA ITEMS TO JOIN TALK
ABOUT WHAT'S COMING UP IN THE
NEAR FUTURE.
>> YES, SO YEAH, WHERE I'M
TAKING SOME NOTES HAS TO I
GUESS THINGS WE ALREADY PLANNED
ON WE WANT BRING MORE BACK MORE
THINGS BACK FROM THE EXISTING
COMPREHENSIVE TRANSITION PLAN
AS TO HOW THINGS ARE BEING
DEPLOYED AND IN PARTICULAR
THERE IS ONE ADDITIONAL TOPIC
THAT'S IN THE EISENHOWER AND
STATE AREA.
SO THERE IS CURRENTLY A SIZABLE
PROPOSAL OF A DIVIDED
PROTOZOANS OVER SOUTH AND THEY
THERE WILL BE EXPECT A SIMILAR
PROPOSALS IN THE KISSI ONE
TRANSIT R&D ZONE.
SO SYNAGIS TAKING A HIGH LEVEL
LOOK AT THE AREA AND TRAVA IS
COORDINATING WITH OUR BECAUSE
I'M GOING TO LOOK AT AN AREA
PLAN WHICH IS GOING TO
OVERARCHINGLY TRY TO GATHER
INDIVIDUAL PARCELS AND PLAN FOR
TRANSPORTATION THAT NEEDS IN
THAT AREA.
SO WE MIGHT BE ABLE TO BRING
SOME UPDATE IN THAT EFFORT AND
CIRCLE BACK THE DOWNTOWN AREA
CIRCULATION ENGAGEMENT.
SO THAT'S ALL I HAVE TO SAY AT
THIS MOMENT.
>> THANK YOU.
AND AS ALWAYS, PLEASE EMAIL OR
SOME CONTACT US IF YOU HAVE
OTHER IDEAS FOR AGENDA TOPICS.
THE NEXT MEETING WILL BE HELD
ON WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 20TH.
TWENTY FOUR AT SEVEN P.M. WILL
ALSO BE A VIRTUAL MEETING LIKE
THIS AND IF THERE ARE NO
OBJECTIONS DURING OUR
OCTOBER 16, 12 24 MEETING, ARE
THERE ANY OBJECTIONS SEEING
NONE OF THIS MEETING IS
ADJOURNED?
>> THANK YOU.
I'M GOING TO PICK YOU UP WITH A
RECORDING STOPPED